The Semiotics
of Drink and
Drinking
A companion website to accompany this book is available online at:
http://linguistics.paulmanning.continuumbooks.com
Please type in the URL above and receive your unique password for
access to the book’s online resources.
If you experience any problems accessing the resources, please contact
Continuum at: info@continuumbooks.com
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd i
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd i
2/21/2001 11:37:42 AM
2/21/2001 11:37:42 AM
BLOOMSBURY ADVANCES IN SEMIOTICS
Semiotics has complemented linguistics by expanding its scope beyond
the phoneme and the sentence to include texts and discourse, and their
rhetorical, performative and ideological functions. It has brought into
focus the multimodality of human communication. Bloomsbury Advances
in Semiotics publishes original works in the fi eld demonstrating robust
scholarship, intellectual creativity, and clarity of exposition. These works
apply semiotic approaches to linguistics and non-verbal productions, social
institutions and discourses, embodied cognition and communication, and
the new virtual realities that have been ushered in by the internet. It also
is inclusive of publications in relevant domains such as socio-semiotics,
evolutionary semiotics, game theory, cultural and literary studies, human-
computer interactions, and the challenging new dimensions of human
networking afforded by social websites.
Series Editor : Paul Bouissac is Professor Emeritus at the University of
Toronto (Victoria College), Canada. He is a world renowned fi gure in
semiotics and a pioneer of circus studies. He runs the SemiotiX Bulletin
[www.semioticon.com/semiotix] which has a global readership.
Titles in the Series:
Buddhist Theory of Semiotics , Fabio Rambelli
Introduction to Peircean Visual Semiotics , Tony Jappy
Semiotics of Drink and Drinking , Paul Manning
Semiotics of Religion , Robert Yelle
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd ii
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd ii
2/21/2001 11:37:42 AM
2/21/2001 11:37:42 AM
BLOOMSBURY ADVANCES IN SEMIOTICS
The Semiotics
of Drink and
Drinking
PAUL MANNING
LON DON • NEW DELHI • NEW YORK • SY DNEY
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd iii
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd iii
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
Bloomsbury Academic
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square
175 Fifth Avenue
London New
York
WC1B 3DP
NY 10010
UK
USA
www.bloomsbury.com
First published 2012
© Paul Manning, 2012
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval
system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.
Paul Manning has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act, 1988, to be identifi ed as Author of this work.
No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or
refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be
accepted by Bloomsbury Academic or the author.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
EISBN: 978-1-4411-4639-7
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Manning, Paul, 1964-
The semiotics of drink and drinking / Paul Manning.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4411-6018-8 (alk. paper) – ISBN 978-1-4411-3774-6 (pbk. : alk. paper) –
ISBN 978-1-4411-4639-7 (ebook pdf : alk. paper) – ISBN 978-1-4411-2451-7
(ebook epub : alk. paper) 1. Semiotics. 2. Drinking customs.
3. Anthropological linguistics. I. Title.
P99.M349 2012
394.1’2–dc23
2011046615
Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems Pvt Ltd, Chennai, India
Printed and bound in India
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd iv
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd iv
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
CONTENTS
1 Introduction 1
2 Coffee 35
3 Gin 60
4 Water 86
5 Colas and uncolas 118
6 Wine 148
7 Vodka 177
8 Beer 205
Notes 226
Bibliography 230
Index 243
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd v
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd v
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd vi
9781441160188_FM_Final_txt_print.indd vi
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
2/21/2001 11:37:43 AM
CHAPTER ONE
Introduction
It was a commonplace of Renaissance humanism that drinking and eating
can both illustrate the opposition between signs and the material world,
and also mediate these opposites:
We live in a divided world, a world in which physical and mental
pleasures are compartmentalized and ordered into a hierarchy: they
either confl ict with each other or are mutually exclusive. . . . We have to
choose whether to speak or to eat: we must not speak with our mouth
full. However the banquet is the one thing that overcomes this division
and allows for the reconciliation of opposites. It recognizes physical
laws, reinstates the legitimate role of instinctive behaviour, but at the
same time provides a place for conversation and a setting for good
manners. (Jeanneret 1991: 1–2)
As the Renaissance humanists realized, the contradictory relationship
between speaking and drinking makes it an excellent arena to study the
relationship between meaning and materiality in general, to construct a
materialist semiotics. 1 Nowhere else is the confl ict and coincidence of the
semiotic and the material orders better displayed than in the duality of
function of the human mouth, an orifi ce divided between what is distinctively
human, the semiotic order of articulate speech, and what we generically
share with other animals, the material order of eating and drinking. As
Charles Darwin observed in his On the Origin of Species (1859: 191),
the evolutionary price humans pay for using the mouth and throat for
the unnatural purpose of speech is high: we are the only animal that can
easily choke to death while eating. For Renaissance humanists, as Jeanneret
argues, this apparent duality of the semiotic and material, spirit and matter,
displayed in the duality of function of the human mouth, underlines the way
that human nature is a combination of these two orders:
The mouth as an organ of both eating and speaking serves to illustrate
this thesis. Ingestion and expression, care for the body and manifestation
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 1
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 1
2/21/2001 11:25:44 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:44 AM
2
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
of the spirit, all take place through the mouth, a symbol of the close links
between these functions. In his treatise on tongues, Erasmus stresses
this duality: the same organ serves to ‘take in food and drink, to emit
sound and to articulate speech’. . . . Such a contiguous relationship
emphasizes the physical dimension of utterance: speaking while one eats,
one becomes aware that words are material substance and physiological
phenomena. (Jeanneret 1991: 33)
Part of the specifi city of the semiotics of food and drink, then, is that eating
and drinking represent at fi rst glance the material antithesis of the purely
semiotic order of speech. However, the mediation of the mouth overcomes
this opposition, showing us that while eating and drinking are semiotic
phenomena, speaking is also a material one. The relationship between
speaking and drinking is also a mutually constituting refl exive one: a drink
can only become a ‘toast’ through the regimenting metasemiotic effect of
words, but the performative effect promised by those words only becomes
fulfi lled when the toast is actually drunk.
This brings me to the second point about how drinks and drinking are
‘special’ in both semiotic and material terms. Drinks, as Michael Dietler
argues, differ from other kinds of material culture in that they represent
‘embodied material culture’:
[A] special kind of material culture created specifi cally to be destroyed,
but destroyed through the transformative process of ingestion into the
human body. Hence, it has an unusually close relationship to the person
and to both the inculcation and the symbolization of concepts of identity
and difference in the construction of the self. (2006: 232)
So part of the meaning of drinks is based on their specifi c material relationship
to human embodiment: they are drinks , so their meaning is completed only
by their teleological association with drinking . The fact that the meaning
of drinks achieve their completion only by being incorporated within the
human body materially is an integral part of their potentials for meaning.
However, all these things specifi c to the semiotics of drinks and drinking
are shared with food and eating. The question arises as to whether there
is anything specifi c to the semiotics of drink that differentiates it from the
semiotics of food? I do not want to make too strong an argument here for
the differences, because, after all, drinking as often as not occurs in close
conjunction with eating, and they therefore are likely to share extensive areas
of common meanings. However, the fact that there are social situations in
which eating and drinking are assigned to meaningfully different ‘channels’
or ‘tracks’ (see Chapter 6 for an example), and that there are events where
drinking fi gures exclusively or predominantly, indicates that we should at
least explore the possibility that there is some generic potential for difference
between the two.
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 2
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 2
2/21/2001 11:25:45 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:45 AM
INTRODUCTION
3
First of all, temporally, the physiological effects of drinking many liquids,
unlike foods, are registered within the event of consumption itself: one
becomes drunk from drinking too many martinis, or jittery from drinking
too much coffee, within the space of a few hours, while one only becomes fat
from eating too much food over the course of weeks or months. Drinking is
thus susceptible to indexing minor changes within a social situation, while
the semiotics of eating tends to index more durable forms of social relation
(I thank Matthew Hull for this observation): speech events involving the
consumption of alcohol drinks, for example, will often be implicitly or
explicitly structured around the general progress of inebriation (a point
made long ago by Charles Frake 1964, see Chapter 6).
Drinks provide different ‘alibis’ for sociable interaction than food does
(I borrow the idea of drinks as an ‘alibi’ for sociability from Eric Laurier
(2008)). As Gaudio notes (2003: 659–60), in the 1997 movie Good Will
Hunting the working-class hero Will displays his unpretentious brilliance
by responding to an invitation to ‘go out for coffee’ with a counter-invitation
to ‘eat a bunch of caramels’, his iconoclastic point being that the linkage
of drinking (coffee) with sociability is an arbitrary convention, one might
just as well eat caramels and talk. Will provides us with a strongly cultural
constructivist critique of the role of materiality in meaning: coffee and
caramels are just equally effective material pegs on which to hang socially
constructed meanings or commensal occasion for talk. If one fi nds this
radically reductionist argument unconvincing, one is forced to admit that
there is something specifi c about the materiality of drink that makes it a
particularly good accompaniment for talk. Without intending to veer into
biological or physiological determinism as a corrective for the excesses of
cultural constructivism, nevertheless perhaps there are ways that drink
potentially affords different kinds of sociability than eating. Perhaps it
is because social drinking is not as strongly occasioned by physiological
thirst as eating is, or perhaps drinking coffee or alcohol does not fulfi l
any perceived physiological need, allowing it to enact more elective and
egalitarian relations than food, which is perhaps more susceptible to
sustaining hierarchical relationships, for example, allowing the host to
‘encompass’ the guest by fulfi lling a basic physiological need. Perhaps,
too, it is simply because one can always have another drink, regardless
of whether one is thirsty or not, allowing it to be a more fl exible alibi for
off-the-cuff sociability, while there is some number of times a day in which
eating yet another full meal begins to approach physical impossibility.
Thirdly, while the Renaissance humanists discussed by Jeanneret’s
fascinating study draw strong linkages between convivial conversation
and convivial eating, table talk and table manners, the classical Greek
authors they looked to as a model seemingly opposed speaking and eating
as absolute opposites, aligning drinking with speaking and eating with
silence. The classical Greek symposium is divided into two parts. In the
fi rst part, the guests ‘eat in silence’, and only when the food is cleared away
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 3
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 3
2/21/2001 11:25:45 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:45 AM
4
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
does the convivial drinking and talking, ‘sympotic wine and poetic word’
begin (Jeanneret 1991: 144, 149). The same equation of eating and silence
is common in parts of the contemporary Middle East like Yemen, and
other non-alcoholic non-food substances like tea, incensed water, smoking
the shisha (water pipe) or chewable qat leaves serve as the infrastructure
for sociable interaction (Meneley forthcoming). As we will see, there are
numerous examples below where the ‘pairing’ of word and drink is stronger
and more intimate than the pairing of word and food, from sociable events
as different as cocktail parties or ancient Greek symposiums.
Since this book is largely about the materiality and meaning of drinks,
drinks as things and drinks as signs, I should fi rst clarify what a sign is, and
what the relationship of ‘signs’ to ‘things’ is.
Ordering things and ordered by things
Drinks, as a phenomenon of material culture, are both ordered by people
into cultural systems (‘ordering things’) and reciprocally act indexically to
order people into those systems (‘ordered by things’) (Miller 2002). First,
ordering things. We might approach drinks in a vaguely Saussurean or
structuralist manner, as a series of things that are ordered according to
a culturally constructed (and therefore conventional or arbitrary) system
of classifi cation or code (Saussurean langue ). When viewed as part of a
code, an object is not viewed semiotically in terms of its material qualities
but rather in terms of its place within a system of structured oppositions
and equivalences, giving it a differential purely negative value to which a
positive meaning (sense) is arbitrarily assigned. In the extreme formulation
of Saussure, who took his basic model of sign to be linguistic sign, the
materiality of the sign does not matter except to establish relations of
contrast and identity (value) to which arbitrary meanings are then assigned
(see, for example, Holdcroft 1991: chapter 6 , Chandler 1994).
The purely negative notion of differential value draws attention to the
way that the meaning of things is always dependent on the other things with
which it is compared and contrasted within a larger system: ‘One’s sense of
any given thing is one in which other things are always implicated’ (Miller
2002: 404). To take a simple example, one cannot determine the meaning
of a single cocktail, say, a martini, without ascertaining its differential
value by locating it within a larger ordering of drinks in general, alcoholic
drinks, and especially a semantic fi eld of oppositions between mixed drinks
called ‘cocktails’. Within this latter system, martinis have a set of arbitrary
distinctive properties that link them to certain other drinks (say, both other
mixed drinks like Gimlets, Rob Roys, and other classic cocktail drinks, but
also straight shots of any spirit) but oppose them to another class of drinks,
for example, those that are informally called ‘girl drinks’ (including, for
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 4
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 4
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
INTRODUCTION
5
example, drinks such as Pink Lady, Sex on the Beach). The former class has
all the classic semiotic properties of a residual ‘unmarked’ term in contrast
to a specifi cally and differentially ‘marked’ term: for one, the former class
does not really have a name, and contains pretty much anything that is
not specifi cally included in the latter class, and not all of them share the
same properties that oppose them to girls drinks. We can call them ‘boy
drinks’ only to emphasize that they are united by their contrast with ‘girl
drinks’, but no one ever calls them that. They are just unmarked ‘drinks’,
they only take on oppositive values as ‘boy drinks’ if they are somehow
opposed to those drinks that are permanently and unavoidably marked
as ‘girl drinks’. Using a classic structuralist mode of analysis, the different
distinctive material properties of each group are ordered into a series of
parallel binary contrasts roughly like so:
‘Girl drink’ (marked)
‘Boy drink’ (unmarked)
Sweet
Not sweet (even bad tasting)
Bright colours
Dark colours or no colour
Decorative presentation (umbrellas!)
Utilitarian presentation
Funny or provocative name
Descriptive name
Mixed
Unmixed
The central perception that the material properties of things are being
ordered according to the social properties of drinkers (gender) is a point
that most drinkers will recognize. In an attenuated way, the existence of the
opposition in drinks points to a general drinking culture in which the two
genders drink together but semiotically enact their gender difference and
transform this gender difference into a (specifi cally heterosexual) sexualized
complementarity by projecting these oppositions onto distinct classes of
drinks. Moreover, the principles of classifi cation here are quite general:
the features that defi ne a drink as a girl drink are found in the gendering
of a whole range of objects (Churchill 2010). And yet, like any general
classifi catory project, certain things or properties of things complicate or
fall out of the classifi cation entirely, our projects of ordering things are
always confronted with objects whose properties complicate or escape this
ordering: A Manhattan is sweet and colourful, is it a girl drink? Almost all
classic ‘Tiki drinks’ (Dr Funk of Tahiti, Arawak, Honi Honi, Zombie) and
many ‘highballs’ (Gin and Tonic, Screwdriver, Singapore Sling) have many
of the properties of girl drinks, but it is debatable whether anyone regards
them as being specifi cally girl drinks.
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 5
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 5
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
6
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
If we order things, we are also ordered by things. The very ubiquity of the
materialization of the ordering system can also produce powerful ordering
effects. If artefacts evoke a classifi catory principle (result of ordering things)
or social distinctions, Miller argues,
to be brought up in such an environment in which the properties of all
things declare the ubiquity of a particular ordering principle, will result
in a perception of the world which takes this ordering principle as second
nature, close to the concept of habit, an order accepted without any
conscious thought or consideration as to the way things might otherwise
be. (2002: 403)
Thus, a lot of the ‘social’ is actually located in, delegated to, non-human
actors (Latour 1992): the bulk of the cultural classifi cation of ‘gender’ is
done to, and done by, non-humans, and one might even go so far as to say
that in our material culture, gender is fi rst and foremost encountered as a
property of things and not people (Churchill 2010).
Some of this ordering by things happens in the aggregate, as the very
ubiquity of the materialization of classifi catory projects works to naturalize
the classifi catory code. However, in the case of embodied material culture,
much of this ‘being ordered by things’ happens on an indexical level (the
token-level relation between a specifi c drink and a specifi c drinker). Once
we have ordered things into a system of classifi cation, they will in turn
order us indexically: in the case of drinks, this will largely happen when
we order them and drink them. The alcoholic (material) aspect of the drink
will make you drunk, but the semiotic aspect of the drink you choose will
determine whether you are a simple drunk or a ‘girl drink drunk’.
Signs and other things
In much of the book, then, I will use a Peircean, rather than Saussurean,
theory of signs for the basis of an account that is better able to deal with the
materiality of the sign. The American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce
defi nes ‘A sign, or representamen , is something which stands to somebody
for something in some respect or capacity’ (1931–58: 2.228).
A sign is something
The fi rst thing we notice is that a sign for Peirce (unlike, for example,
Saussure) is something . That is, it is a thing, in the broadest possible sense;
it has a material form as a sign vehicle (or representamen ). Since Peirce
arranges all his defi nitions into triads, there are three basic kinds of sign
vehicles. First, drinks, as material objects, embody potentially meaningful
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 6
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 6
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
INTRODUCTION
7
qualities (
qualisigns ) in excess of those required by whatever semiotic
labour they perform. These qualisigns are potentialities (hence they are
also called occasionally ‘potisigns’); to become actually meaningful and
effective, they must be embodied in an individual sign vehicle ( sinsign ),
they must be part of something material, real or actual (hence sinsigns
are also called ‘actisigns’): every individual drink and act of drinking is a
sinsign . Lastly, since drinks are often the subject of conventional systems
of classifi cation as we have already seen, any individual sinsign (individual
drink like ‘a martini’), may be a token -level instantiation of a conventional
category (a legisign , or type, such as ‘martini’).
So, taking this simple example, the qualisigns that are conventionally
relevant to an ordinary mixed drink like a martini include, for example, that
it is composed of at least gin or vodka and dry vermouth, that the resultant
drink is served cold, that it exhibits features like clarity, purity, and an elusive
and variable property called ‘dryness’. It will have other variable material
properties too (e.g. how ‘dry’ it is, whether it is ‘dirty’, or served with olive
or lemon peel), but these are not relevant to its conventional defi nition as a
martini. Any single martini will exhibit, then, a set of qualisigns (most of
which are material properties that are defi ned as qualisigns by some sort of
cultural system) which remain mere abstractions until they are embodied
in a single instance of a martini (a sinsign). The type (legisign), martini, is
defi ned by these features, and any token of the type has to have this set of
qualisigns in order to count as a token of the type (sinsign). However, any
individual dry martini is made by a slightly different recipe or different
conditions, so while the ‘digital’ (either/or) defi nition of the ‘dry’ martini as
a type (legisign) doesn’t care how much vermouth there is, any individual
‘dry’ martini (sinsign) will vary considerably in ‘analogue’ (more/less) terms
in terms of just exactly how dry it is (see Chandler 1994 for some of these
distinctions).
A sign stands to someone
Secondly, a sign stands to someone, signs are signs because they address
someone. Drinks stand ‘to someone’ in a very specifi c way. Drinks are
material objects and they are signs, and their status as a sign depends
on their status as a material object, and this depends on how they stand
to someone , in the fi rst instance, they stand to someone as a drink to be
drunk. So, going back to cocktails in general, one property these all have
is that they have additional meanings that can only be recovered when you
consider their ‘sinsign’ (token) relationship to the drinker: if you drink a lot
of either of them, you will suffer delusions of wit and charm, get drunk,
fall down, puke, get the spins, and mercifully black out. This is a causal
(indexical) effect they have as things on human bodies ( embodied material
culture).
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 7
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 7
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
8
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
So one property that cocktails share are the causal ones that anyone who
drinks enough of them will become familiar with. But there are also aspects
of their materiality that are only salient to some drinkers, and being sensitive
or insensitive to such properties marks the difference between a connoisseur
and an average drunk. For example, a badly mixed martini is still a martini
for the latter, in that it gets the job done. But a martini connoisseur will
fi nd the exact balance of qualities, as well as the presence of undesirable
qualities, as a foundation for pronouncing some martinis closer to the
prototypical martini than others, and incidentally establish themselves as
the kind of person who can make authoritative pronouncements on this
topic. Many martini connoisseurs will also cavil about whether a vodka
martini is a martini at all (thereby at least establishing the gin martini
as the prototype of the class and consigning the consumption of vodka
martinis to those who like the taste of vermouth (Matus 2011)). There is,
of course, plenty of room for argument between these two positions about
the proper function of, and therefore correct basis for appreciation of,
the martini: if the connoisseur thinks the drunk next to him ordering an
improperly mixed martini is a yob, the drunk is just as likely to think that
connoisseurship of weaponized alcohol-delivery devices like the martini is
pompous and basically missing the point anyway. As Kingsley Amis notes,
‘the world of booze is rent by little controversies that are never settled’
(2008: 193), and these controversies over booze give us excellent insights
into the semiotic life of drinks and drinking.
So the system of classifi cation as either/or type (legisign) still allows a
fade-out of token-level instances of the type from ‘more’ to ‘less’, ‘better’
to worse’ which provide the stuff of argument. In addition, not only are
some of the tokens of the type stratifi ed into ‘better’ or ‘worse’ examples,
there exists for each classifi catory system (type) whose tokens are stratifi ed
into ‘better or worse’ examples a set of (self-appointed or institutionally
appointed) experts, whose job, roughly speaking, is to authoritatively
verbally regulate the referential extension of the type classifi cation to the
token-level instances. Both these systems of expertise are enacted in the form
of ‘trials’, a term I will use roughly in the sense of Latour (1999: 122–4,
311, see also Callon et al. 2002: 198 on ‘qualifi cation trials’), whether these
performances take the form of laboratory tests or organoleptic tests such as
wine-tastings, or even ordering a drink or getting drunk, and part of what
these trials do is classify or qualify specifi c actors (including humans and
non-humans) in terms of these typifi cations. So acts of reference, among
other things, always have something of the form of trial inasmuch as
reference involves ‘qualifi cation’, extending type-level categories to token-
level entities by describing or characterizing them.
But in these different kinds of ‘trials’, the way the connoisseur’s expertise
is constructed differs from the way a scientist’s expertise is constructed (see
Silverstein 2003, 2006). As Hilary Putnam, in a famous article, The Meaning
of Meaning (1975), shows, certain terms for naturally existing types (‘natural
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 8
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 8
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
INTRODUCTION
9
kind terms’, the examples he uses are ‘elm’ and ‘gold’) are used in everyday
reference to objects by people who actually have no idea how to securely
identify whether the individual object being referred to really is a token of
the type. I, for example, spoke of ‘pines’ and ‘fi rs’ for many years without
the foggiest idea which of the needle-bearing trees was which. Such terms,
Putnam argues, involve a linguistic division of labour , or, as Silverstein
(2006: 488) puts it ‘a sociolinguistic division of denotational labor’, in that
some speakers (let’s call them ‘natural scientists’) are invested with the
authority to make authoritative pronouncements about which individuals
are tokens of which type (we are talking about naturally occurring types
like elm or gold ). Such denotational terms, then, are socially stratifi ed , or
unevenly distributed in society, in that there are speakers who can extend
them in reference to objects authoritatively, and other speakers whose use of
those terms is parasitic on the authority of these other speakers. In the case
of natural kind terms, these are either/or and not more/less identifi cations,
an object either is, or is not, an elm, or gold.
The social stratifi cation of terms used by connoisseurs in organoleptic
trials (e.g. wine-tasting (Silverstein 2003, 2006), olive-oil tasting (Meneley
2007)) differs from the paradigmatic model of laboratory trials (e.g. Latour
1999: 122–4) in that it may involve ‘scientifi c’ either/or identifi cations (using
standardized professional terminologies broadly parasitic on ‘scientifi c’
paradigms of reference), but it seems to have a lot of analogue ‘more or
less’ qualities, as well as qualities expressed in ‘stylistic, colorful, non-
terminologized descriptors’ (Silverstein 2003: 224). As Silverstein argues,
while some aspects of events of connoisseurship do mimic the paradigmatic
‘scientifi c’ model of standardized terminologies reminiscent of natural
kinds, they also involve an almost eucharistic refl exive moment in which
the ability to recognize and deploy ‘socially stratifi ed’ denotational terms
to the wine iconically indexes a similar degree of social ‘distinction’ in
the speaker: ‘As we consume the wine and properly (ritually) denote that
consumption, we become, in performative realtime, [a correspondingly]
well-bred, characterologically interesting (subtle, balanced, intriguing,
winning, etc.) person’ (Silverstein 2003: 226). In other words, while the
laboratory trial is primarily about defi ning the properties of the object, the
organoleptic trial defi nes both the prestigious properties of the wine and
the connoisseur at the same time (see Chapters 4–5).
Just as we order things into cultural systems of types (‘martinis’, ‘girls
drinks’), these cultural typifi cations order us in turn by association (we
move from ‘ordering things’ to ‘being ordered by things’). Operating in the
‘scientifi c’ mode, the connoisseur is simply ‘ordering things’, putting the
properties of the prestige commodity to trial. Operating in the ‘eucharistic’
mode, the connoisseur is undergoing trial themselves, ‘being ordered by
things’, indexing their own ability to recognize and denote the prestige-
conferring properties of the prestige commodity and so gain ‘distinction’
from the organoleptic encounter. The expertise of the connoisseur is thus,
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 9
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 9
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:46 AM
10
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
in Silverstein’s analysis, a curious but revealing hybrid of these two different
kinds of ‘trial’. But much more prosaically, the same principle of ‘ordering
things’ and ‘being ordered by things’ can be found, fi rst and foremost, in the
very act of ‘ordering a drink’ (as we will see in Chapter 2). In some places,
to order a ‘martini on the rocks’ is to exhibit a certain lack of knowledge of
what a martini is, but for a man to order a ‘girl drink’ is not only to exhibit
a lack of knowledge of what a girl drink is or even to invite imputations of
gender confusion or even gender dysphoria.
In some respect or capacity
The other important part of the Peircean defi nition of the sign is the relation
or ‘ground’ between the sign vehicle and the object, the way that the sign
stands for something to someone
in some respect or capacity. These
Peircean semiotic terms for different kinds of constitutive relation between
sign and object (‘ground’) I defi ne as follows (broadly following Peircean
defi nitions found in Chandler 1994):
Icon: A sign that stands for its object by virtue of similarity or
resemblance, for example, any mimetic image, a pencil drawing or
painting of a tree in relation to the tree itself.
Index: A sign that stands for its object by existential or physical
connection or contiguity, for example, a weathercock pointing in
the direction of the prevailing wind, or the way physical evidence
at a crime scene (a bullet hole, blood on the fl oor) points to the
commission of the crime (the bullet that made the hole, the wound
that produced the blood).
Symbol: A sign that stands for its object by convention alone, for
example, the conventional signs of a language, which must be
memorized by rote.
Note that any single sign may partake of different grounds: a footprint in
the sand is both an icon and index of the foot that made it; a photograph
similarly is an index (since it is produced by a chemical reaction in the
fi lm made by light coming from the object photographed) but also an icon
(because it resembles the object); a map is a simplifi ed icon of the territory it
represents (the distances between points on a scale map resemble the relative
distances between equivalent points in the territory), but also consists of
conventional symbols (which are decoded by the legend on the map). Lastly,
to be usable (and not a map of an imaginary territory like a map of Middle
Earth), there has to be a way to mediate indexically between the map and
the territory it represents: there must be landmarks to fi nd where one is in
terms of the map, or on a fi xed map like the map of a university campus, a
‘you are here’ which serves as an index.
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 10
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 10
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
INTRODUCTION
11
Ordering principles: Semiotic ideologies and
social ontologies
This brings me to the next point, the potential (indexical or iconic) meanings
of drinks (whether they are regarded as being purely material quenching of
the thirst or being conventionally symbolic of, say, something about the
drinker or the event of drinking) remain just that, potentials, until they are
(conventionally) construed in some way. Indexes and icons ‘assert nothing’,
they depend on the ‘semiotic ideologies’ which construe them, and these
ideologies in turn depend on broader basic assumptions about what exists
in the world (ontologies) (Keane 2003: 409, see also Parmentier 1994: 142,
154). As Webb Keane defi nes this term:
By semiotic ideology I mean basic assumptions about what signs are and
how they function in the world. It determines, for instance, what people
will consider the role that intentions play in signifi cation to be, what
kinds of possible agent (humans only? Animals? Spirits?) exist to which
acts of signifi cation might be imputed, whether signs are arbitrary or
necessarily linked to their objects, and so forth. (2003: 419)
Depending on how they are construed, the kinds of qualities of an object
(qualisigns) can afford different semiotic potentialities, allowing objects of
different kinds to be synthesized and become parts of different complex
networks of meaning. Like any other material object, any sign vehicle
‘bundles’ together different sensuous qualities and properties (Keane 2003:
414), some of which are symbolically relevant, others not, for any given
interpretation. I note here that by recognizing the need for a construing
cultural order of shared representations and practices, semiotic ideologies
and social ontologies, this book differs from the otherwise very comparable
‘materialist’ semiotics developed within the fi eld of Science and Technology
Studies (particularly the work of Bruno Latour and John Law). Since I have
borrowed heavily from their work here and there, I should recognize
that the need for a construing conventional order of Peircean ‘thirdness’
(culture, semiotic ideologies, social ontology) to supplement the emergent
‘mess’ of the world of Peircean ‘secondness’ means that my invocation of
specifi c terms from this fi eld will always have a compromise ‘hybrid’ quality
(I thank Paul Kockelman for reminding me to make this caveat).
Qualisigns and aff ordances:
The voices of things
The term qualisign will be important in what follows, and it is important
that it has two rather different uses. As originally used by Peirce, a qualisign
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 11
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 11
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
12
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
refers to any quality ( quali-) of an object that affords a potential for it to act
as a sign ( -sign ). Thus, he also uses the term potisign to emphasize its status
as a pure potentiality for signifi cation (I thank Nick Harkness for reminding
me of this Peircean term). Thus, depending on whether this potentiality is
actualized by being conventionally recognized, the term can refer both to
the ‘semiotic’ and ‘material’ properties of the sign. In fact, Peirce defi nes
the ‘material’ properties of the sign as being simply the inevitable surplus
of potentials (qualisigns) that are not currently meaningful. As Peirce put
it, ‘since a sign is not identical with the thing signifi ed, but differs from the
latter in some respects, it must plainly have some characters which belong
to it in itself. . . . These I call the material qualities of the sign’ (1868). The
example Peirce gives is the word ‘man’ written in different media: from
‘semiotic’ perspective, insofar as we are interested only in the capacity of
these different written forms to convey the word ‘man’, it hardly matters
whether the word is written with ink on paper, chalk on a slate, a marking
pen on a wall, or scrawled with a knife in a desk. But from the perspective
of a janitor trying to clean up a classroom, or an administrator trying to
determine whether the inscription counts as proper use of the classroom or
vandalism, the differences in the material realizations of the sign make a
good deal of difference, and these various ‘material’ differences can take on
a material and semiotic life of their own subsequently.
The term qualisign, however, is strongly suggestive of ‘meaningful
qualities’ of a sign (i.e. those potential qualisigns that have been invested
with conventional meanings). Nancy Munn (1986) has infl uentially and
effectively used the term to organize the qualities that organize Gawan
Kula exchange to mean, as Webb Keane paraphrases her defi nition, ‘certain
sensuous qualities of objects that have a privileged role within a larger
system of value’ (2003: 414). By focusing on this particular reading of the
term qualisign (qualisigns that have been conventionalized within a cultural
system), Munn fi nds identities between very different modes of qualities like
‘lightness’ across different material manifestations (bodies, canoes) without
simply reducing these material identities to a purely cultural construction:
One of Munn’s key ethnographic insights was that a culturally
meaningful quality such as ‘buoyancy’ or ‘lightness’ . . . could be
experienced via any number of objects of sensory experience, e.g., the
wetness and expansiveness of the sea, the slipperiness of fi sh, the
fl uttering motion of birds, the lightness of the heated and dried wood
of a canoe, or the quickness of a brilliantly-adorned dancing body.
(Harkness forthcoming)
The two conceptions of qualisigns afford us different avenues for
interrogating the materiality of signs. Munn’s conception of qualisign
allows us to synthesize different qualities materially manifested in fairly
different ways but construed as ‘the same’ or at least comparable within a
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 12
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 12
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
INTRODUCTION
13
cultural system: they allow us to give a cultural account of iconicity that is
at the same time attendant to materiality. Qualisigns in the Peircean sense
are also important for the study of materiality of signs because they point
to what Keane calls ‘bundling’: qualisigns (like ‘redness’, Peirce’s favourite
example), after all, are only potentials; they must be materially embodied
in particular objects.
But as soon as they do, they are actually, and often contingently (rather
than by logical necessity), bound up with other qualities – redness in an
apple comes along with spherical shape, light weight, and so forth. In
practice, there is no way entirely to eliminate that factor of co-presence
or what we might call ‘bundling. This points to one of the obvious, but
important, effects of materiality: redness cannot be manifest without
some embodiment that inescapably binds it to some other qualities as
well, which can become contingent but real factors in its social life.
(Keane 2003: 414)
The bundled ‘material’ aspects of a sign not only afford the potential for
semiotic ‘re-readings’ and revalorization of the sign, but also afford the
possibility of a whole series of ‘nonsemiotic events and happenings’ that
form the material biography of the thing as a thing, and not as a sign
(Hull 2012: 29), including all the contingencies and causalities they are
subject to as things and not as signs (Keane 2003).
In this last sense, the term qualisign refers to properties of an object
that are similar to what are usually called ‘affordances’ in Science and
Technology Studies, offering a way that the materiality of an object can
play a role without resorting either to reductive positions of determinism
(in which the material properties of the object determine its functions) nor
constructivism (in which the qualities of the object are entirely the product
of a construing discourse). Building on the work of Gibson (1979), Hutchby
defi nes affordances generally as the multiple functional and relational
possibilities (realized or unrealized) that a material object offers for action
(Hutchby 2001a: 26). According to this view,
[A]ffordances are not just functional but also relational aspects of an
object’s material presence in the world. Affordances are functional in the
sense that they are enabling, as well as constraining, factors in a given
organism’s attempt to engage in some activity: for instance, walking,
or hiding, photocopying a document, and so on. Certain objects,
environments or artefacts have affordances which enable the particular
activity while others do not. But at the same time the affordances can
shape the conditions of possibility associated with an action: it may be
possible to do it one way, but not another. The relational aspect, by
contrast, draws our attention to the way that the affordances of an object
may be different for one species than for another. (Hutchby 2001b: 448)
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 13
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 13
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
14
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The two concepts are doppelgangers inhabiting opposed sides of the semiotic/
technical or sociotechnical divide: One might say, therefore, that qualisigns
are the semiotic affordances of a thing. In general, we might attempt to
overcome the opposition between the social/semiotic aspects of the sign and
the technical/material aspects of the thing, bringing them together under
a single rubric, similar to what Munn (1977) calls ‘fabrication’, including
both notionally ‘symbolic’ and ‘technical’ interventions transformative of
qualisigns (‘socially signifi cant properties’) or affordances (‘operational
capacities of objects’), respectively, as well as all the transformations of
either sort in the entire circulatory career of the object including production,
exchange and consumption:
This view of fabrication sets the stage for a study of making processes
not simply as, for instance, technological construction, but rather as
developing symbolic processes that transform both socially signifi cant
properties or operational capacities of objects, and signifi cant aspects
of the relations between persons and objects, between the human and
the material worlds. Fabrication, seen in this way, does not end with
technological construction, but consists of the total cycle of conversions
effecting signifi cant changes in the object. (Munn 1977: 39)
Drinks and drunks
In the literature on drinking, this dualistic opposition between the ‘social/
semiotic’ and the ‘technical/material’ takes on a specifi c form, especially
when we are talking about alcoholic drinks, namely, the opposition between
‘social’ drinking as Durkheimian ritual expression of community and
‘antisocial’ drinking as purely material social pathology (Douglas 1987).
One important sensuous property of the drinks considered in this book is
that some of them are alcoholic, others are not. Whether this is treated as
a material or semiotic property of drinks has led to a rather unproductive
division within the literature on drinking across the social sciences, one
which refl ects all the inherited naturalistic dualisms between meaning and
materiality, cultural constructivism and technical determinism. The bulk
of the drinking literature is determinist: it seizes on this one property of
drink (alcohol content) which is given only causal (indexical) signifi cance
(Drink → Drank → Drunk), then proceeds to link it instantly with excessive
and pathological forms of consumption (Drink → Drunks). Thus the only
question that can be asked about alcoholic beverages (drinks) are the social
pathologies they may create physiologically (drunks) (Douglas 1987: 4–6).
Of course, the alternate position is ultimately no more satisfying, which
is, in effect, to take a strongly dematerialized cultural constructivist
stance towards the problem, ignoring alcohol content and associated
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 14
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 14
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:47 AM
INTRODUCTION
15
pathologies, focusing only on moderate drinking and situations where
drinking is embedded in ritual events expressive of Durkheimian collective
effervescence, so that you might easily forget that vodka has a higher alcohol
content than beer, or soft drinks for that matter. In the limiting case, whole
analyses of the social or cultural signifi cance of coffee houses or cocktail
parties are carried out without a single cup of coffee or cocktail fi guring
into the account (Douglas 1987: 6). Such dematerialized accounts are no
more satisfying than a structuralist account of, say, the somewhat brazen
semiotics of ‘girl drinks’ which forgets that those drinks are so concocted
not only for their semiotic form but also for their considerable alcoholic
content, or that they work indexically not only to reclassify the drinker as
a ‘girl’ (part of the cultural ‘code’), but they also get that drinker drunk
(materially: the sweetness masks the fl avour of the alcohol, for one thing).
Drinks’ relation to talk: Topical and
infrastructural drinking
How to bridge this dualism? One place to look to bring drinks back into
events of speaking is to explore what kinds of calibrations exist between the
obviously semiotic order of speaking and the material order of drinks (see
Frake 1964 for a classic early discussion of the calibration of the material order
of drinking and the verbal order of speech genres). The opposed functions of
the mouth (speaking and drinking) are physiologically consigned to be non-
coincident, but in larger events of convivial consumption, such as saying
and drinking a toast, they are brought into close alignment. So, drinking
derives part of its semiotic power by being aligned with, or contrasted with,
the more obviously semiotic function of speech. When drinking is embedded
in a ritual action, a performative utterance such as a toast (Austinian
performance utterances are those which ‘do’ something, which performs
some signifi cant social action, have a consequential conventional indexical
effect on their social context, think of ‘I now pronounce you man and wife’
at a wedding ceremony (Austin 1962)), drinking a toast is foregrounded as
being in itself a performative act as important as speaking the toast. One
might even say that the drinking is the actual performative moment of the
toast. I’ll call this form of drinking which is explicitly commented upon or
regimented by accompanying talk ‘topical drinking’.
But if in ‘topical drinking’ the drink belongs to the foregrounded
‘message’, in other events of speaking and drinking it has other roles to play
as part of the backgrounded channel or infrastructure of communication.
We move from drinking as topic for talk to drinking as infrastructure for
talk. This is particularly the case in those forms of sociable communication,
what Jakobson, following Malinowski, labelled ‘phatic communion’,
communication which foregrounds the channel of communication (Elyachar
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 15
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 15
2/21/2001 11:25:48 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:48 AM
16
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
2010). Julia Elyachar has recently provocatively claimed that sociable talk of
this sort, talk that builds, maintains and preserves infrastructural channels
of communication, amounts to a kind of ‘phatic labor’ which ‘creates a
social infrastructure of communicative channels that are as essential to
economy as roads, bridges, or telephone lines’ (2010: 452). But if sociable
talk, ‘phatic labor’, works to create seen-but-unnoticed infrastructural
channels of communication, it is often the case that drinks, drinking
and places for drinking produce the material infrastructures for sociable
talk, what Ellis calls ‘architectures of sociability’ (2008: 161). Elyachar
describes, for example, the ‘Grand Central Coffeehouse’ of Cairo as a
central ‘communicative hub’ of this infrastructure of sociability:
The coffeehouse is a beehive of sociality, where men from workshops chat
and gossip over instruments of conviviality such as coffee, tea, and water
pipes (shisha) . . . . In popular communities of Cairo, the coffeehouse
is a place where practices of sociality integral to male productive work
are prominently on display. It is a communicative hub of phatic labor.
(2010: 454)
When it is embedded as part of a ritual act like a toast that draws attention
to, verbally foregrounds and regiments the meaning of the drink, then
drinking is ‘topical’ and obviously ‘semiotic’. When it is sunk into the
semiotic substrates of communicative infrastructures, then drinking takes
on all the defi ning properties of such infrastructures, becoming invisible,
presupposed, backgrounded (Star 1999: 380). Thus, for all the social and
historical importance conferred indirectly on places of drinking like cafes
in contemporary social theory (Chapter 2), one hardly ever hears a word
about the drinks or the drinking that defi ne these events or places: cocktail
parties are described without drinks or drunks, cafes are described without
a single item on the menu:
At the heart of the café is the activity which is often remarked on and then
quickly passed over in favour of something more apparently profound,
the drinking of drinks. Drinking, be it of beer or coffee or milk, keeps
our mouths occupied during all manner of sociable occasions where
those mouths are also and otherwise engaged in talking. Drinking serves
as an alibi for conviviality, we are at the café to drink coffee and not to
hang around with other people for the pleasure of hanging around with
other people. (Laurier 2008: 171)
While social theorists of the café like Jurgen Habermas (1992) or Ray
Olderberg (1989) seek to fi nd something more important therein, like how
the café serves as a laboratory for the creation of new modern forms of public
association and circulation of texts (see, for example, Laurier and Philo
2007), they miss the point of the powerful role that drinks and drinking
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 16
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 16
2/21/2001 11:25:48 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:48 AM
INTRODUCTION
17
play in producing the conditions of possibility for these to exist. As Laurier
points out in his sensitive and nuanced analysis, ‘what might be distinctive
about going for a coffee in the café is that it might be an occasion without
“a” reason, thus, unlike the telephone call with its ever-present “reason
for calling”’, the convivial drinking of coffee (the offi cial purpose) gives an
alibi, an enabling infrastructural condition, for unmotivated sociable talk
(2008: 178–9). But as Laurier also shows, drinking serves as more than
an alibi, it serves as an infrastructure regulating the channel throughout,
serving as a resource for both easing the conversation along, but emptying
the glass also provides a resource for ending the conversation:
[T]he very fact of drinking, rather than what substance people are
drinking, eases the conversation along. In particular here we have seen
how the last sips are involved in the last remarks on a conversation on a
particular topic. (2008: 178)
Drinking elsewheres: Cultures of circulation
The semiotics of drink are not only limited to face-to-face events of commensal
consumption and face-to-face talk; however, drinks create worlds in both
acts of consumption and in their circulation as well. Drinks are, as Foster
puts it, ‘worldly things’: worldly because they are both physically present
here and now and yet ‘bear traces of their simultaneous existence elsewhere,
over and beyond one’s immediate horizons’ (2008a: xvii).
Drinks, worldly things, produce worlds. As Mary Douglas reminds us in
her discussion of ‘constructive drinking’, drinks and drinking are not only
deployed representationally in ritual events to produce idealized models
of the social world (‘ceremonials of drinking construct an ideal world’
(1979: 8, 11–12)), but they are also part of that world: ‘[D]rinks are in the
world. They are not a commentary on it’ (1979: 9). Since drinks are in the
world , drinks actually traverse the world as circulatory objects, indexing
the dimensions, contours and horizons of their imagined circulatory worlds,
and refl ecting the dimensions of their circulation in their own material
and semiotic properties (Munn 1977, 1986, Law and Hetherington 1999,
Lee and LiPuma 2002). Looking at drinks as constitutive elements of
‘cultures of circulation’, which are ‘created and animated by the cultural
forms that circulate through them’ (Lee and LiPuma 2002: 192), provides
a different window on how drinks, worldly things, are both in the world
and create worlds by their actual circulation. I note that while the two
groups of authors I have cited here (include both anthropologists working
on ‘cultures of circulation’ (Munn, Lee and LiPuma) and scholars within
Actor-Network-Theory (Law and Hetherington)) have strikingly similar
views about how the actual circulation of objects creates the spaces and
times in which they circulate, they differ in one important respect: those
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 17
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 17
2/21/2001 11:25:48 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:48 AM
18
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
who work with a model of ‘cultures of circulation’ or ‘social imaginaries’
deal not only with the material circulation of objects (sinsign level, Peircean
secondness), but they also supplement it with a collective imaginary act
(legisign level, Peircean thirdness, shared representations and practices
including semiotic ideologies and social ontologies) which regiments or
organizes this circulation (hence the circulatory objects are also ‘cultural
forms’). As Lee and LiPuma (2002: 192) put it: ‘The circulation of such
forms always presupposes the existence of their respective interpretive
communities, with their own forms of interpretation and evaluation.’
The circulation of drinks creates worlds; it also divides those worlds.
Circulation is similar to the term ‘communication’ as discussed by John
Peters in his book Speaking into the Air (1999), in that it is inherently
dualistic: circulation, like communication, is both a bridge and a chasm.
Peters argues that the idea of communication ‘simultaneously call[s] up
the dream of instantaneous access and the nightmare of the labyrinth of
solitude’ (1999: 5). If Peters shows the mediated nature of communication
produces both fantasies of immediacy and fears of hypermediation, the
same is true for circulation. Circulation spatio-temporally divides the
immediacy of a ‘natural economy’, where producers are either immediate
consumers, or at least know them as consociates, into a mediated world
in which producers and consumers are anonymous contemporaries who
can only infer each others’ existence indirectly through media such as
commodities. The troubling division of the idyllic unity of the natural
economy into a postlapsarian opposition between separate spheres of
production and consumption leads to fantasies of reconnecting producers
and consumers in an unmediated fashion: farmer’s markets, the slow food
movement, the farm to fork movement, to name a few such recent responses
(see Meneley 2004, Paxson 2010, Weiss 2011 and references there). But as
for communication, so with circulation, the idea of either of these as a face-
to-face ‘person-to-person activity became thinkable only in the shadow of
mediated [long-distance] communication’ (Peters 1999: 6). The fantasy of
meeting the producer face to face, we might say, can only be thinkable
in the shadow of industrial commodity production and long-distance
exchange. As a result of this duality, circulation can both create worlds
(circulation as bridge: immediacy) and also divide worlds (circulation as
chasm: hypermediation), depending on how the circulatory medium is
foregrounded or backgrounded (see Chapters 5, 8).
Consider, for a moment, the object lesson of gin (the topic of Chapter 3).
First, consumption: drinking gin and tonics across the British empire was
surely an archetypal ritual of imperial elites on the verandas of colonial
clubhouses and bungalows across the British empire, expressive both of
the solidarity of these exiled elites against the natives who served them
their cocktails and also their pervasive fear of malaria in the tropics. The
British colonials drinking gin in the clubhouse, worrying about the supply
of ice, longing to be back in Picadilly, and heatedly discussing the possible
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 18
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 18
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
INTRODUCTION
19
admissibility of ‘Orientals’ (the nicest term that is used) into the British
Club in Orwell’s Burmese Days (1934: chapter 2 ; on the colonial category
of ‘clubbability’, see Sinha 2001) is a classic literary illustration, even
though there they are drinking gin either straight or with lemonade in that
scene. Then, circulation: Gin could mediate between the metropole where
it was produced (‘London dry gin’, wherever it was actually produced) and
the colonies where it was consumed in part because it had the requisite
material qualities that allowed it to cross the oceans intact from the place
it was produced (cf. Munn 1986, Law and Hetherington 1999), allowing
gin drinkers in the colonies (consumption) an indexical connection to the
civilized metropole (production). Consider, by comparison, the diffi culties
attended by beer traversing that same voyage, which were so great that an
entirely new form of beer (India Pale Ale) was created to bring beer intact
to the colonies.
Gin, too, a compound of neutral grain spirits produced in the imperial
metropole fl avoured with exotic botanicals from tropical climes, is not
only indexical of the imperial space in which it circulates, but is also an
icon of the distinct kinds of spaces of empire that are brought together
in the production of every bottle (Matthew Hull, Tyler Curtain, personal
communications). Thus, gin both helped create a world (the empire) by its
circulation and consumption, but also divided that world, creating colonial
oppositions between the civilized metropole (‘London Dry Gin’; neutral
grain spirits and water) and the colonies (the mixture with quinine-bearing
tonic water indexed the unhealthy colonial clime; the exotic fl avours of the
botanicals), or oppositions between colonizer (the colonial on the veranda
drinking the gin and tonic) and the colonized (the servant bringing the
gin and tonic) brought together within the wider world of empire. One
can examine the way gin was consumed ritualistically or one can look at
the circulatory object itself, to see worlds, and divisions within worlds,
writ large in small things. Finally, lost or imaginary worlds: consider that
now gin and gin marketing is completely unimaginable without nostalgic
reference to the colonies, the empire, the Raj (London Dry Gin now travels
under brand names like ‘Bombay Sapphire’ or ‘Old Raj Gin’); gin bears the
afterimage of an orientalist imaginary geography (Said 1979), its erstwhile
sphere of circulation and consumption, which is now a lost, nostalgic world
found mostly on the labels of gin bottles.
When one drinks a gin and tonic now, one can vicariously participate
nostalgically in an exotic lost world of empire. But there are whole categories
of mixed drinks which gesture to such exotic milieus and lost worlds: when
I drink a Singapore Sling, I can imagine myself in a colonial milieu in the
Tiffi n Room of the Raffl es hotel in a lost colonial-era Singapore; when
I visit a Tiki bar, with drinks that materially confl ate the West Indies
(Rum) with the East Indies (pineapple juice and glasses shaped like Tiki
gods), I confabulate with a whole American postwar colonial imaginary
of ‘the tropics’. When I drink a dry gin martini, I imagine myself in a
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 19
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 19
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
20
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
classic American modernist metropole at some date just before I was
born. And so on. Drinks thus construct elsewheres within space and time,
imaginative geographies that make their consumption meaningful in a way
that transcends here and now.
The sphere of production:
Source-identifying indexicals
As already noted, drinks as circulatory objects also index more abstract
divisions of social ontologies, notably the modern opposition between
opposed spheres of production and consumption, or production and market.
For this reason, too, an account of the semiotics of drink and drinking that
focuses only on consumption is incomplete. Because, like foods, they must
be consumed through actual incorporation into the body, aspects of the
production of drinks are often a matter of great concern for consumers.
Thus, production is related to consumption not only externally because it
produces the material object that will be consumed, but also internally, in
that categories of production inform consumption from within:
Production not only furnishes consumption with its object, in an external
relation, and consumption not only provides production with its telos,
but they also stand in internal relations, as Marx reminds us. Symbolic
and technical categories of production are an immanent moment in
consumption, and consumption internally informs the production
processes . . . . Indeed, food and drink represent embodied epistemologies
that are always already intertwined with the transformative work of
production and consumption. (Heath and Meneley 2007: 593–4)
Properties of production can become ‘immanent’ to consumption in
two different ways. On the one hand, of course, since production is the
paradigmatic example of transformative ‘fabrication’ defi ned above,
production is the source of many of the sensible properties of the item to
be consumed. However, consumers are also interested in the source of
the things they consume, a set of indexical properties denoting aspects of
production (‘organic’, ‘kosher’, ‘halal’, ‘natural’) that may have no obvious
sensory correlate or associated qualisigns. Such source-related properties
often cannot be sensed or inferred from their sensory properties: they
are, we might say real (indexical) properties, but they are non-qualitative
(resembling in some ways the scholastic concept of haecceity ‘thisness’ in
that they are real distinctions without qualitative difference). Such relational
properties of products bring us back to the fraught scholastic debates
on questions of whether things that are (qualitatively) non-discernable
are identical, and if so, how. Sensuous qualities like ‘taste’ are logically
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 20
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 20
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
INTRODUCTION
21
different from, and potentially independent of, relations like ‘[being from
a] place’: the predicates like ‘taste’ are intrinsic sensible qualities of a thing
irrespective of anything else, they belong to Peircean ‘fi rstness’; predicates
like ‘[being from a] place’ defi nes the properties of one entity in terms of a
necessary relation to a second, and thus belong to Peircean ‘secondness’. 2
These ‘source-identifying indexicals’ have three different aspects of note:
fi rst, at least some of them are non-qualitative (in that they do not resemble
the sensuous qualisigns we have already argued for (Peircean fi rstness ),
to the extent that they are discernable, it is only through some sort of
expert trial mentioned above); secondly, they identify the source of the
product, and hence are indexical (Peircean secondness ); thirdly, like other
non-qualitative properties of products, their very existence must usually
be relayed to the consumer discursively from an expert to the consumer
through a discursive chain of authentication (Peircean thirdness ).
All non-qualitative properties of products (from medicinal qualities to
categories of ritual purity) have in common that they cannot be inferred
by direct sensory evidence of ordinary consumers, but only by a chain of
discursive authentication, usually ultimately grounded in a connoisseur or
technoscientifi c expert discourse. In some cases, in fact, the very existence
of such properties may be controversial, in the event that a given commodity
does not yet have an established authoritative connoisseur discourse, and
consumers must be ‘educated’ to discern them (see Weiss 2011). Elsewhere,
Meneley in her discussion of the qualities of olive oils refers to the qualisigns
of olive oils that are sensible (to ordinary consumers) as ‘pheno-qualisigns’,
while those which are constituted by discursive chains of connoisseur or
technoscientifi c authentication as ‘cryptoqualisigns’:
The latter are discursive qualities (available from discourse alone)
rather than sensuous qualities which are available from a direct
sensorial encounter with the object. So the general trajectory is from
sensory appreciation to technoscientifi c intervention and ratifi cation.
(2008: 309)
Within this class of non-qualitative properties, a signifi cant class are
‘indexicals’: properties of consumer items that index something about how
they were made, where they were made, and by whom. A good example of
indexicals that index real differences of production but have no discernible
qualitative correlate would be categories of ritual purity like ‘kosher’ and
‘halal’ (we will see a parallel Georgian example in Chapter 7). While some
may claim that there is a discernible qualitative difference between these
(and someone surely will), the point is that qualitative difference of, say,
taste, is not what these categories are about. A fortiori the existence of
such non-qualitative source indexicals show that it is possible for source-
identifying indexicals to differentiate products in a way that is indiscernible
in ordinary (non-expert) taste trials, and which therefore must be relayed
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 21
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 21
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
22
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
to the consumer by a discursive chain of authentication. My point is that
just as ‘kosher’ and ‘halal’ are real indexical properties of production that
have no qualitative correlate (you can’t taste them), so too it is possible
to imagine that categories of relation like ‘organic’, ‘natural’, ‘local’ and
terroir do too. Even though the category of terroir is sometimes defi ned
qualitatively as a ‘taste of place’ (Paxson 2010, Weiss 2011), it remains that
it is possible to imagine ‘place’ as having an important role in consumption
without requiring that place have a ‘taste’, and our semiotic account should
maintain distinctions so that we do not immediately assume that place will
map to taste.
However, if
terroir does reside in a ‘taste of place’, then this will
presumably involve source-identifying indexicals (place of origin) being
refl ected qualitatively (possibly iconically) in the taste of the product.
However, this conversion of indexes (secondness) into icons (fi rstness)
that makes ‘place’ into ‘taste’ is the contingent result of a good deal of
material and semiotic work. Source-identifying indexicals require that a
place be identifi ed as such there can be any talk of indexing that place or
of there being a ‘taste of place’ (see Chapter 4 for details). For example, the
discourse of terroir , as Parry argues (2008), constructs localities as sharply
bounded, naturalized, essentialized ‘hermetically sealed’ containers, each
attribute of which – whether natural (soil, climate, varietal), cultural
(traditional techniques of production) or spiritual – must be made to ‘sit
still’ in order to be included. Only after one has made such a locality can
one make products that index the particularities of that locality and thence
refl ect this indexical relation to place in their taste. As Weiss (2001) shows,
for example, the work of ‘making pigs local’ requires among other things
educating consumers to recognize not only the value of ‘place’ but also to
be able to discern the distinctive ‘taste of place’.
There are various ways that a consumer good can index its source,
and various kinds of sources that can be indexed. The most general form
of distinctive source-identifying indexical in capitalist markets is the
trademark, defi ned in EU law, for example, as ‘any sign capable of being
represented graphically which is capable of distinguishing goods or services
of one undertaking from those of others’ (Davis 2008: 68, American law
has similar defi nitions, see, for example, Schechter 1927). Trademarks,
it should be noted, generally indicate a personalistic source (originally,
perhaps, the craftsman or merchant, but by now a fi ctive person such as
a corporation or undertaking), they describe the source in terms of ‘who?’
Since trademarks generally presume a mobile personalistic source which is
not territorialized (Bently 2008), trademarks are opposed to another legal
category of source-identifying indexical which present the source in terms
of ‘where?’ In this category fall Denominations of Origin (DOPs), protected
appellations of origin, geographical indications and terroirs , categories
which exist more or less exclusively for the categories of food and drink
(Phillips 2003: 605, Parry 2009). Interestingly, as Phillips points out, if
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 22
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 22
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
INTRODUCTION
23
the majority of trademarks are either of US origin or are controlled by
US companies, the majority of geographical indications and terroirs are of
European origin (Phillips 2003: 604).
Thus, drinks share with contemporary discourses of food connoisseurship
the fact that they are founded in part by indexing a picturesque locality
of production, usually a hybrid of nature and culture, including both
properties of climate, soil and traditional methods of artisanal production,
which taken together defi ne the old world concept of terroir (Parry 2008,
Paxson 2010, Weiss 2011): Champagne, Roquefort, after all, are places .
The concept of a distinctive ‘taste of place’ has proven to be quite portable,
even if, as Paxson (2010) notes, it requires considerable ‘reverse engineering’
to bring the Old World concept of a terroir , usually defi ned as a picturesque
assemblage of human and non-human factors of production, to the new
world, where the category of traditional artisanal production is missing.
California wines, for example, achieved a new world version of old world
terroir by shifting away from brand names to place names:
As the perception of where California wines came from changed from
the vast central valley tract to the microclimate, the language the labels
used to refl ect it came to be a highly specifi c one of ridges, ranches, lanes,
coasts, hills and creeks. This not only communicated the uniqueness of
a vineyard but also, more subtly, the very European idea of a poetry of
place. (Kuh 2001: 144)
Similarly, California cuisine adopted a regional discourse of locality of
production in which
the ‘large’ California has been replaced [by] the ‘small’ one of the ‘creek’,
the ‘bay’, and the ‘farmer’s market’, generating familiar menu descriptions
loaded with picturesque small scale localities like ‘Spender’s Tomales
Bay bluepoint oysters on ice, . . . Big Sur Garrapata Creek smoked trout
steamed over California bay leaves, . . . Vela dry Monterey Jack cheese
from Sonoma . . .’ (Kuh 2001: 147)
The semiotic transition from the ‘large’ California, the California of the
Central Valley, California as Agricultural Conglomerate, to the ‘small’
California of wine labels and Chez Panisse menus, refl ects a more general
shift in the valuation of production from what Rachel Laudan called
‘Culinary Modernism’ to ‘Culinary Luddism’ (2001). Culinary modernism
refers to a discourse of food that foregrounds anonymous industrial
production as affording egalitarian access to relatively safe food, while
culinary luddism (typifi ed by California cuisine, the slow food movement,
the farm to fork movement, locavores, etc.) seeks to ground consumption in
immediate, almost face-to-face relations between producers and consumers
(Meneley 2004, Weiss 2011), refl ecting a ‘desire to retain the identities of
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 23
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 23
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
24
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
the producers, and the place of production in the product as opposed to the
anonymity of industrially produced food’ (Meneley 2004: 172). Thus, the
opposition between culinary modernism and culinary luddism in part boils
down to questions of whether they index their source. Some ingredients,
like water, can be either the anonymous, deterritorialized water of culinary
modernism, or the highly localized, naturalized water ‘with terroir ’ of
culinary luddism:
Consider the water that a bottle of Coke contains. Where does it come
from? While goods such as Fiji Water loudly proclaim their answer to
this question, products such as Coca-Cola largely obviate the inquiry –
until circumstances dictate otherwise. (Foster 2008b: 38)
The product and the brand
Source-identifying indexicals, particularly those that localize products
within a circumscribed terroir , are largely discourses which valorize (non-
industrial) aspects of production. The ‘taste of place’ is the taste of the
place of production. Such highly naturalizing and localizing discourses
produce a special commodity register of the authentic, the artisanal, that
is particularly salient in the marketing of food commodities, which is
generally opposed to the much more widespread semiotic logic of modern
trademarks and brand. Discourses as different as terroir and trademarks
or brands would seem to have in common that they index sources, but the
discourse of trademark, it has been argued, ‘does not function to identify
the true origin of goods. It functions to obscure that origin, to cover it with
a myth of origin’ (Beebe 2008: 52). The ‘artisanal’ discourse valorizing
production uses source-identifying indexicals to build bridges between
producers and consumers, the ‘aspirational’ discourse of brand, one might
argue, seeks instead to create chasms between production and the market, to
consolidate the market and consumption as semiotic domains autonomous
from production.
This tendency is most apparent in the category of brand. Brand is generally
agreed to be a semiotic outgrowth, or parasite, on the foundational source-
identifying indexical relation of trademark, usually pointing to something
like a body of regimented consumer associations that have built up around
the trademark (Moore 2003: 339, see also Mazzarella 2003, Davis 2008,
Manning 2010). Brands inherit from trademarks that their distinctive
properties are defi ned in opposition to the generic properties of the product.
As I have argued elsewhere:
‘The product and the brand’ . . . form a privileged doublet, expressed
in popular marketing mantras such as ‘a product is made in a factory: a
brand is bought by a consumer’. . . . As mantras such as this show, the
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 24
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 24
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:49 AM
INTRODUCTION
25
defi nition of brand develops over time by a kind of mystical via negativa ,
defi ning itself not so much by saying what brand is as what it is not: the
product. (Manning 2010: 36)
The duality of ‘the product and the brand’ maps directly onto the
opposition between the technical sphere of production and the purely
social sphere of commerce and consumption: just as Marx defi nes the
fi nishing stage where a product becomes a commodity as the ‘locational
movement’ to market, so brand professionals defi ne the transition from
material product to immaterial brand (1973: 524). This dualism also
recapitulates a broadly naturalist division between the technical or natural
properties of the product established in production (human interaction
with nature) versus the social properties of the brand (which are purely
human associations established in the market). As a consequence, in the
discourse of brand the purely material properties of the product (‘product
qualities’) are opposed to the rather more social imaginative properties
of the brand (which refl ect the regimented associations held in the minds
of the consumers). In the limiting case, not only does brand discourse
avoid discussion of dead material ‘product qualities’, it also replaces them
with a whole series of anthropomorphic or animate qualities (‘Young!
Fresh! Edgy!’) of the ‘brand personality’: ‘Here the pervasive associations
based on the role brands play in consumers’ lives are transformed into
actual anthropomorphic characteristics imputed to brands understood as
holistic, organic, living, growing entities with which consumers can form
actual social relationships directly’ (Manning 2010: 36).
The transition from the technical ‘thing world’ of production (the
product) to the social human world of commerce (the brand) is also a
transition in the dominant functions of speech, a sea-change in semiotic
ideologies. Product discourse is a realist technical discourse privileging
the referential function: things have real properties, and these properties
are correctly picked out in truthful reference by disinterested experts in
product trials (of the different kinds discussed above) which are then relayed
to consumers by regulated chains of authentication. In both legal and
philosophical literature, this referential ideology (in this case, description
of product qualities) is typifi ed by disinterested expert scientifi c reference
to objects in the world ‘out there’. The paradigmatic example of this, as we
have seen, are the conditions for truthful reference for natural kind terms
(terms like elm or gold or mineral water ) when they are correctly and
authoritatively applied to existing natural kinds by (disinterested scientifi c)
‘expert’ speakers (Putnam 1975). Thus, reference is broadly aligned with
the domain of non-humans (nature), the world of production is a world
of reference, a thingly world in which the properties of things exist ‘out
there’ and the role of expert speakers (scientists, government regulators) in
product trials is to ensure that the product qualities that are described are
not misrepresentations.
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 25
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 25
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
26
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
By contrast, brand discourse tends not only towards dematerialization
(opposition to the materiality of the product), but also is emphatically
directed towards the social rather than the material, emancipating the
associations created in consumer imagination from the dull factuality
of product description, and using them to animate the brand as a social
being in its own right. Brand discourse is part of a series of related semiotic
ideologies of ‘commercial speech’ (including branding and puffery)
(Parmentier 1994) which are located in the imagined world of the market
and privilege the purely social relation between the seller and the buyer
(‘aspirational messaging’) over referential ideologies of product description
(‘educational messaging’). If the world of production is one in which the
technical and natural properties of things are privileged by a referential
ideology, the world of the marketplace is one in which things have no
voice, there are no experts, all the parties are interested social ones and all
product claims belong not to the order of information but to persuasion
(see Agnew 1986, Parmentier 1994, Keane 2008: 35, see also Manning
2001, 2002). Ideologies of ‘commercial speech’ (e.g. ‘puffery’, ‘aspirational
messaging’) assume not a disinterested expert interface between subject
and object (human and non-human), but an exclusively human world in
which the interesting participants are all interested human parties (sellers
and buyers, even the brands become anthropomorphic ‘persons’), and all
claims are considered to be rhetorical, indexical of interested positions of
human speakers seeking to persuade other humans to buy.
In the former domain, the natural properties of the product are accorded
part of the agency in determining conditions for correct and truthful
reference within the framework of a product trial, in the latter, humans
of the network, variously sellers, brand professionals and consumers are
accorded most of the agency in the negotiated social construction of the
product image or brand. In general, one might say that certain forms of
potentially misleading commercial speech (‘puffery’) are legally free to
expand as long as they strictly avoid making metamessage claims that
would appear to ground them in the prototypical ‘scientifi c’ model of
referential speech, by using ‘scientifi c overtones’, referencing ‘well-controlled
scientifi c studies’ or mentioning experts such as doctors, physicians or
other ‘scientifi c testimony’ (Parmentier 1994: 147–8). Thus, the domains of
disinterested expert ‘scientifi c reference’ (product qualities) and interested
seller ‘commercial speech’ (brand qualities) are opposed as the natural world
(production, product) and the social world (market, brand). The semiotic
opposition between ‘the product and the brand’ then is basically a refl ex of
this broader naturalist ontology (Manning 2010).
At fi rst glance, the strongly constructivist discourse of brand, which seeks
to build associations in the minds of consumers that are purely products of
the imagination, is absolutely opposed to the strongly realist discourse that
characterizes localist or artisanal discourses about food. Both discourses
seek to ground products in fi elds of association, but the discourse of
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 26
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 26
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
INTRODUCTION
27
brand seeks to valorize associations that occur in the imagination of the
consumer, while the varied artisanal discourses about food seek to fashion
real associations of products with place into the discernible attributes
of taste. However, the discourse of brand is protean, promiscuous and
omnivorous, so marketing professionals will usually attempt to have their
cake and eat it too, often making a basic distinction between a referential
discourse about the product (‘educational messaging’) which often takes
the form of a discourse of connoisseurship, and a non-referential discourse
of ‘aspirational messaging’ which seeks to develop consumer associations
with the brand which are understood to be emotive, imaginative, and not
based in fact:
Educational messaging covers quality, craftsmanship, heritage and
production techniques used to create the product. The learnings can
create both real and perceived benefi ts in a consumer’s mind. . . . For
many consumers, it is the feeling of being ‘in the know’ which instils
pride in being a connoisseur, deserving of quality. Alternatively brands
appeal more directly to emotions through aspirational marketing
messages. Products are positioned as a step away from the ordinary and
the gateway to a far more luxurious life. (Fresh Minds 2006)
However, even this apparently clear division is routinely hybridized in
marketing practice. Non-referential forms of (legally protected) commercial
speech (puffery, aspirational messaging) frequently mimic referential
product description, replacing referential ‘description’ with non-referential
‘suggestion’. The problem is, while legal ideologies assume an idealized
consumer who is sceptical of biased product claims, most actual consumers
are completely unaware that the referentiality of a term can vary according
to what kind of product it is applied to, much less are they aware that
what may seem at fi rst glance to be a purely ‘educational message’ may
be so phrased as to have the non-referential suggestiveness of a purely
‘aspirational’ one. This situation is part of a more general split between
the legal metasemiotic ideologies that protect puffery in commercial speech
and the lay metasemiotic ideologies which tend to treat commercial speech
as being regulated, and therefore informational (Parmentier 1994).
Briefl y, as Parmentier demonstrates, the legal ideologies that support the
metasemiotic category of puffery are of the caveat emptor variety, that
is, they assume an idealized reasonable and sceptical consumer who can
detect when a falsifi able proposition has been uttered or not, and who
therefore assumes that commercial speech is basically persuasive (indexical
of seller bias) rather than informational (referential). However, empirical
evidence shows that most real consumers approach commercial speech with
a growing ‘ideology of reference’ that assumes that, because of extensive
governmental and legal regulation of the referentiality at least some
product claims, all commercial speech is ‘informational, ideally truthful,
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 27
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 27
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
28
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
and subject to verifi cation’ rather than interested, persuasive and indexical
of seller bias (puffery) (Parmentier 1994: 145): ‘The regulated referentiality
of one portion of [an] ad is, then, transferred to expressions of puffery,
attributing to them analogically the factuality previously dismissed by all
reasonable people’ (Parmentier 1994: 146). As a result of this sea change
in the metasemiotic consensus, studies show even the most patently
non-propositional statements about products are likely to be somehow
‘believed’. My favourite example is the remarkable fact that Alcoa’s ad
‘Today, Aluminum is something else’ was believed to be completely or
partly true by 83 per cent of all respondents (Parmentier 1994: 152, see
also Hoffman 2006).
Social ontologies: Naturalism(s)
More generally, the opposition between product and brand, like many of
the other dualisms in this book, including meaning/materiality, social/
technical, recapitulates the foundational opposition in our naturalist
ontology between nature and culture:
In our naturalist ontology, the nature/society interface is natural:
humans are organisms like all the rest – we are body-objects in
ecological interaction with other bodies and forces, all of them ruled
by the necessary laws of biology and physics. Productive forces harness,
and thereby express, natural forces. Social relations – that is, contractual
or instituted relations between subjects – can only exist internal to
human society (there is no such thing as ‘relations of production’ linking
humans to animals or plants, let alone political relations). . . . Given
the universality of nature, the status of the human and social world
is unstable. Thus, Western thought oscillates, historically, between a
naturalistic monism (sociobiology and evolutionary psychology being
two of its current avatars) and an ontological dualism of nature and
culture (‘culturalism’ and symbolic anthropology being two of its recent
expressions). (Viveiros de Castro 2004: 480–1)
We would be wrong to elevate the various dualisms that confront us, all of
which are in one way or another a refl ection of this basic naturalist ontology,
to universals that form part of our armature of analysis wherever we go, so
there is a strong temptation to abandon these familiar terms and substitute
more abstract and unfamiliar neologisms that do not elevate these dualisms
to unanalysed conceptual tools. Because these ontological divisions, with
all their internal contradictions and ambiguities, are not external to the
object of study, as I am arguing, but an integral part of the objects of study,
my approach will be to use these ‘indigenous’ categories as part of a general
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 28
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 28
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
INTRODUCTION
29
technique of ‘immanent analysis’, similar to the way that Marx used the
received categories of classical political economy to produce an ‘immanent
critique’ of political economy (as Postone 1993 argues). But just as vulgar
readings of Marx seize on this to accuse him of being simply one of the
political economists he critiques, I hope that readers will understand that
nature and culture, and all the other subtended oppositions, are part of
my analysis because the best way to assume a critical or analytic stance
with respect to naturalism is not (only) from an external perspective (as
advocated by workers in Actor-Network-Theory who use an unfamiliar
‘infra-language’ (Latour 2005: 30) to defamiliarize this social ontology,
but (also) using the Marxian technique of analysing the system (and its
contradictions) from an internal perspective (Marxian inspired ‘immanent
analysis’), critically using the categories of the system under analysis as a
semiotic metalanguage for the system, and showing how and where these
categories produce hybrids and contradictions.
So this book will remain haunted by the dualistic vocabulary of
naturalism, because it is the very social ontology I am interested in studying:
virtually all the people under study in this book subscribe to some form
of modernist naturalist ontology, including all the subtended oppositions
between materiality and meaning, production and consumption, technical
and social/symbolic, product and brand. This is true even though at least
half this book considers cases drawn from the world of socialism, an
ideological milieu growing out of the same modernist naturalist ontology
as capitalism, but with a different valuation of the terms of the inherited
oppositions, making it a true alternate modernity. The eerie familiarity
crossed with strangeness of socialist modernity (Gal 2002: 80), I argue,
offers us an external analytic standpoint to ‘make strange’ the seen-but-
unnoticed familiarity of the semiotic categories of Western capitalist
modernity. For example, while socialism involves the same basic naturalist
oppositions between nature and culture, production and consumption, it
nevertheless lacks some other ones more typical of capitalism, particularly,
as we will see, the category of ‘artisanal’ manufacture which serves to
separate culinary luddism from culinary modernism is absent, and more
generally industrial production is not strongly opposed to nature. Hence,
the opposition between culinary luddism and culinary modernism is almost
entirely absent from Soviet production, but elements that appear to belong
to either discourse are mixed together.
Dramatis personae: The chapters
Lastly, the question of drinks as actors. The different chapters of this book
are each devoted to a different aspect of a different drink whose material
properties mediate sociality to such an extent that an entire ethnography
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 29
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 29
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
30
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
of a certain place and time can be written with that drink as the ‘hero’ of
the story. In this sense, the book borrows both from the general analytic
strategy of Actor-Network-Theory to distribute agency across heterogeneous
networks of humans and non-humans, to treat things as being actors
alongside humans (Latour 1999), but also materialist approaches within
anthropology that involve ‘a sustained focus on things rather than on
people’ (Foster 2008a: 23) ‘by acknowledging the materiality of things
before becoming engrossed in their meanings’ (Foster 2008b: 38).
My rhetorical approach here is inspired by Fernando Ortiz’ classic
historical ethnography of Cuba: C uban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar
(1995 [1947]). In this ethnography, the ethnographic history of Cuba is
presented allegorically through the ‘two most important personages in
the history of Cuba’ (Ortiz 1995 [1947]: 4): sugar and tobacco. From the
contrasting material and biological properties of these two plants which serve
as the ‘heroes’ the personages of the narrative, the whole history of Cuba is
spun, and yet, this is done without any sort of sense of determinism. They
are both metaphors and metonyms: ‘As metaphoric constructs condensing
a multiplicity of meanings, tobacco and sugar stand for themselves, as
agricultural products, as well for their changing conditions of production’
(Coronil 1995: xxii):
By casting commodities as the main actors of his historical narrative,
Ortiz at once displaces the conventional focus on human historical
protagonists and revalorizes historical agency. Acting both as objects and
subjects of history, commodities are shown to be not merely products of
human activity, but active forces which constrain and empower it. Thus
historical agency comes to include the generative conditions of agency
itself. As a critique of reifi cation, Ortiz’ counterfetishism questions both
conservative interpretations that reduce history to the actions of external
forces, and humanist and liberal conceptions that ascribe historical
agency exclusively to people. (Coronil 1995: xxix–xxx)
Now I turn to the dramatis personae, the different drinks who will act as
the protagonists of this story. Chapters 2 and 3 (‘Coffee’ and ‘Gin’) develop
a story grounded exclusively in a familiar context of Western modernity,
telling two tales about two drinks that serve as the material ground for a
quality of modern interaction called ‘sociability’ or ‘sociable talk’. In both
cases, I attempt to tell a story about interaction between humans that in
one way or another foregrounds the materiality of the drinks that serve
as an infrastructure for this interaction. In the chapter on coffee, I change
my point of orientation from the sociable talk normatively associated with
coffee houses in most social theory to the more transactional, purposive
talk that allows customers to get their coffee in the fi rst place. In the chapter
on gin, I turn attention to the materiality of gin and the martini as emblems
of industrial modernity (Laudan’s ‘culinary modernism’), before turning to
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 30
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 30
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
INTRODUCTION
31
the specifi c form of ‘modern’ sociable conversation associated with these
drinks, the cocktail party, considered as a set of communicative channels
which produce both sociable signals and drunken noise. Finally, I turn to
the story of how gin (and vodka), once an industrial ‘culinary modernist’
drink par excellence evaluated for its relative lack of distinguishing natural
properties (dryness and purity) has become drawn into the slipstream of the
aesthetic of ‘culinary luddism’, a discourse which foregrounds ‘artisanal’
gins and the natural botanicals that give them distinctive marketable
properties.
Chapters 4 and 5 (‘Water’ and ‘Colas and Uncolas’) take us into more
comparative territory, looking at American and Soviet versions of similar
products like bottled waters (both artifi cially purifi ed and natural mineral
waters) and soft drinks (Western ‘colas’ and Soviet ‘uncolas’). In the chapter
on waters, we see how two different kinds of bottled water, American
purifi ed waters (typifi ed by the Coca-Cola brand BonAqua) and Natural
Mineral Waters (typifi ed by the Georgian mineral water Borjomi, the most
popular socialist mineral water) stabilize as distinctive kinds of goods with
distinctive tastes and properties and indexing distinctive semiotic ideologies
of nature, production, and so on, and then watch how they encounter each
other in postsocialist Georgia and Russia, producing strange hybrids of
nature and culture, American and Soviet tastes, on a number of semiotic
levels. In the chapter on colas and uncolas, we look at another pairing of
American and Soviet commodity, the Western colas Pepsi and Coca-Cola,
and the Soviet ‘uncola’, Laghidze’s waters (also from Georgia), showing
how the circulation of these ‘exceptional’ commodities produces different
imaginary elsewhere in relation to the order of ordinary socialist things,
and how the opposition between socialist and capitalism as competing
modernities is imagined through these competing commodities into the
postsocialist period.
Chapters 6, 7 and 8 (‘Wine’, ‘Vodka’ and ‘Beer’) are grounded
exclusively in my own fi eldwork in the republic of Georgia. The chapter
on wine explores the ritual order in which wine consumption is embedded
in Georgia, studied from the point of view of satirical Soviet cartoons,
which among other things emphasize the materiality of the ritual over its
moral dimension, and importantly emphasize quantities of consumption
of drink and especially food in opposition to the social ‘meaning’ of the
feast, thereby associating this traditional ritual with material corruption
and decadent consumption (echoing latent everyday discourses that do the
same). At the same time, late socialist critiques of this ritual order link the
ritual order of wine consumption to Stalinism, mining the ritual order of
wine consumption for materials for the critique of Georgian politics and
civil society: after all, the republic of Georgia is the alleged birthplace
of wine, and the actual birthplace of Josef Stalin. In turn, new Western
forms of drink and drinking, including mixed drinks like the martini
and cocktail parties, represent in contrast to the wine-mediated supra
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 31
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 31
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
32
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
(associated with socialism) a new ‘democratic’ form of drinking refl ecting
democratic aspirations.
The following chapter, on vodka, is the most self-contained, since
it is viewed from the ethnographic lens of Georgian highland Khevsur
communities around the turn of the nineteenth–early twentieth centuries,
taking as its point of departure the local proverb ‘vodka is the drink of devils’.
The odd contradiction between vodka’s debased cosmological position as
the demon drink and its pervasiveness in mediating social relations, this
chapter situates vodka, in contrast to beer, the ‘sacred’ ritual drink par
excellence in these communities, within the kinds of social relationships it
mediates (particularly romantic liaisons) and compares it to other semiotic
media (love poetry) that circulate alongside it. Love poetry composed
by girls circulate in tandem with glass bottles of stolen vodka saved as a
marker of love and pining, designating a quasi-private sphere of romantic
involvement opposed at every step to ‘masculine’, ‘public’ prestations of
beer and the masculine poetic ‘public’ of the shrine ritual and its attendant
genres.
The fi nal chapter, which deals with beer consumption and beer
marketing in postsocialist Georgia, serves as a conclusion, since it reprises
many themes found in the preceding chapters. Under postsocialism, the
most successful Georgian brands have been beer brands, which perform far
better than Georgian wine brands, although Georgia is known for wine and
not beer. In fact, the beers produced in Georgia are essentially European
lagers, in terms of their material contents; the only marketable ‘Georgian’
property they contain is the water. How then to market European lagers
as Georgian national brands without losing their desirable ‘European’
qualities? The answer is that Georgians use a ‘dual lineage’ marketing
strategy: On the one hand, they emphasize the use of the most modern
European technologies, on the other hand, they ground the production
of beer in Georgian ethnographic traditions or in the waters for which
Georgia is famed. Culinary modernism and culinary luddism are given an
extorted reconciliation in a sort of ‘shotgun wedding’. Georgia’s essentially
ambivalent relation to Europe and modernity is mirrored in the way that
they market beer ‘dualistically’, incidentally recapitulating most of the
distinctions discussed in the preceding chapters.
Acknowledgements
This book grows out of a series of somewhat random contingencies, mostly
connected to the trials and tribulations of teaching. Many of the ideas
here were initially explored in classroom settings, as part of a desire to
produce a topically related set of readings in materialist semiotics for my
students. First and foremost, then, I would like to thank my colleague Kate
Dougherty at Trent University, for helping me formulate, develop and teach
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 32
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 32
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
INTRODUCTION
33
these materials. Anne Meneley also deserves special thanks for not only
helping me think through these problems and also her sometimes caustic but
always amusing and insightful commentary, and especially for her careful
(sometimes brutal) editing of the entirety of an earlier draft of the book.
The materials have grown out of conversations and comments by many
other friends and colleagues over a number of years. I thank Kristof
van Assche, Tom Boellstorff, Bruce Grant, Nicholas Harkness, Paul
Kockelman, Erin Koch, Alaina Lemon, Florian Mühlfried and Kevin
Tuite, for generously reading and commenting on various chapters in
their various instantiations. Matthew Hull gets extra special thanks for
helping me completely rethink my introduction. In addition to these people,
I thank Asif Agha, Zhenya Bernshtein, Tyler Curtain, Krizsti Fehervary,
Robert Foster, Victor Friedman, Susan Gal, Adi Hastings, Julie Hastings,
Webb Keane, Eric Laurier, Robert Moore, Costas Nakassis, Erin Pappas,
Harsha Ram, Ariana Reguant, Hulya Sakarya, Perry Sherouse, Rupert
Stasch, Talbot Taylor and Adam Walker and other people who have helped
me formulate some of the problems addressed here or have attended and
commented on presentations of this material. My thinking about the topic
of drinking in semiotic terms was inspired fi rst and foremost by my graduate
advisor Michael Silverstein’s work, especially his memorable lectures on
‘oinoglossia’. I also thank William Hanks, whose lectures on the cultural
defi nition of ‘drinking’ in Yucatec Mayan, while they did not end up in this
book, nevertheless infl uenced me a great deal indirectly in my interest in the
topic. Much of the material here took, at one time or another, the form of
talks and presentations. In addition to the people already named above, I’d
like to thank Natalya Czarnecki, Steve Coleman, Miyako Inoue, Rebecca
Pardo, Jack Sidnell and Kevin Tuite for generously providing me with venues
to present some of these materials. My Georgian friends and colleagues
Paata Bukhrashvili, Emzar Jgerenaia, Xvtiso Mamisimedishvili, Tamuna
Otiashvili, Zaza Shatirishvili, Dato Toklikishvili, Anne Uplisashvili and
Mzia Chikhradze, among others too numerous to mention, have helped me
over the years to understand Georgian drinking in ways that I cannot hope
to thank adequately. I single out for special thanks Emzar Jgerenaia, who
not only infl uenced me strongly through his work on the Supra, but who
inspired me to expand my work in areas like beer. I thank Anne Uplisashvili
who worked with me on the beer project for what turned out to be a
mutually enriching collaboration. Dato Toklikishvili, my research assistant,
deserves special thanks for his tireless and innovative ways of achieving
research results in the face of the obduracy of Georgian bureaucracy. Zaza
Shatirishvili (and his family) has been, in all matters relating to interpreting
Georgia and beyond, an absolutely central interlocutor in this and my other
projects in Georgia. I thank my friends Elizbar and Lena Bregadze, and
their friends and family, for their friendship and hospitality, and especially
for their lively and insightful, but sometimes contradictory, commentaries
on all things relating to Georgia and drinking.
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 33
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 33
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:50 AM
34
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Lastly, I thank my editors, Paul Bouissac and Gurdeep Mattu, for their
interest in this project and giving me the opportunity to fi nally put this
heterogeneous set of materials into a coherent form. Funds provided by the
National Council for Eurasian and East European Research (NCEEER),
under authority of a Title VIII grant from the US Department of State,
as well as an NEH Collaborative Research Fellowship, administered by
American Councils for International Education (ACTR), and separate
grants from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of
Canada (SSHRC), supported the work leading to this report in whole or in
part. Neither NCEEER, the NEH, ACTR, SSHRC nor the US or Canadian
governments is responsible for the views expressed within this text. Errors,
no doubt many, are my own.
I dedicate this book, my fi rst, to my family, particularly my parents,
Harvey and Betty Manning, in hopes that my father would have enjoyed
reading it, and that my mother will enjoy reading it. At the moment of
writing, too, the Occupation Movement spreads from city to city, and
I respectfully tip my hat to them.
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 34
9781441160188_Ch01_Final_txt_print.indd 34
2/21/2001 11:25:51 AM
2/21/2001 11:25:51 AM
CHAPTER TWO
Coff ee
To talk about coffee and coffee shops is to talk about talk. There are few other
cases where the material order of drinks and infrastructures for drinking have
become so closely entwined with imagining an idealized form of sociable
interaction, the semiotic order of egalitarian conversation. In much postwar
social theory, places for commensal drinking of coffee, what Ellis (2008)
elsewhere calls ‘architectures of sociability’, and Julia Elyachar (2010) calls
‘infrastructures of phatic labor’, are emblematic of the tenor of interaction
characteristic of modern urban public life in general: stranger sociability,
egalitarian conversations between peers without status constraints.
The early coffee-house was associated with a certain kind of social
interaction – what sociologists call a sociability – of which the distinctive
feature was an egalitarian and congenial mode of conversation. This
model of sociable interaction has been, since the 18th century, central to
theories about the city and public culture, but also about our knowledge
about the modern individual, drawing on the perception that through
knowing each other, people know themselves. (Ellis 2002)
Whether these are eighteenth-century English coffee houses, nineteenth-
century Parisian cafes or twentieth-century Viennese cafes, such institutions
are taken by many modern social theorists to emblematize and typify
some period, some key moment or juncture, of Western urban modernity,
and especially associated genres of modern sociability, among them
conversation (Gaudio 2003, Ellis 2002, 2004, 2008, Laurier and Philo
2007, Laurier 2008). The material order of coffee and coffee shops become
semiotic laboratories in which modern forms of sociable interaction are
invented. And reinvented. As both Ellis (2002) and Gaudio (2003) argue,
in the contemporary brand discourse of Starbucks, this pervasive modern
association of material and semiotic orders, coffee and sociable talk, has
been appropriated and branded as distinctive attributes of the Starbucks
brand, so that not merely the coffee associated with sociability is sold
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 35
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 35
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
36
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
under the Starbucks brand, but sociability itself: ‘Although the company
proclaims its business is coffee, it might be better thought of as a retailer of
sociability’ (Ellis 2002). As Ellis argues, reshaping of sociable talk as part of
the Starbucks brand fi nds a ready analogy in the reshaping of cosmopolitan
coffee drinks on the Starbucks menu.
In the end, the single most plangent signal of the Starbucks coffee-house
is the coffee itself. The customer’s endless variation of specifi cations
reinforces the individualism of the experience. Unlike the bitter beverage
of the 18th century (‘Syrrop of Soot, or Essence of old Shooes’), Starbucks
offers coffee from the land of milk and honey: vast concoctions of
milk, cream, and Torriani syrups. Starbucks’s penchant for lacto-coffee
symbolically exemplifi es the warm, mammalian calm of their reformed
coffee house. In the sociability of Starbucks, an atomized society fi nds
a convenient representation of the city of individuals. This sociability
is not collective and public but is rather about being alone together,
about fragmenting public discourse into non-organized entities, about
consuming rather than debating. In the lactifi cation of the coffee-house,
the historically-enduring semiotics of coffee, redolent of conspiracy and
conversation, is usurped by the infantilizing comfort of the semiotics of
milk. (Ellis 2002: n.p.) 1
But while both Ellis and Gaudio provide rich critiques of the appropriation
of the Starbucks brand of a pervasive association of (prestige) coffees/coffee
houses and an idealized model of sociable conversation, my objective here
is to pursue a slightly different aspect of the same semiotic relationship.
Before customers can sit down with their coffee, and engage in sociable talk
with peers about things other than coffee, they must fi rst talk about coffee
with non-peers: they must ‘order’ a coffee drink from a Starbucks barista,
in a recognizable and understandable fashion. That customers frequently
fail to do so is the occasion for ‘troubles’ for baristas (for ‘troubles’ or
‘repairables’ see Sidnell 2007: 238), who convey these dialogic troubles in
other forums in monologic rants, rants which consist simply of reporting
failed and fumbled orders by ‘stupid’ customers. In these rants about
customers failing to talk coherently about coffee, I think, can be found
rich materials for understanding the ways that coffee and conversation
constitute one another semiotically and socially.
Monologues about dialogues: Real rants
about imagined conversations
‘Talk’ lives multiple lives, both serving as an imaginary object as well as an
empirical activity, embedded in various social and technical domains that
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 36
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 36
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
COFFEE
37
mediate it in ways that are not visible in ‘the transcript’. What I intend to
show here is that phenomenon of talk can serve not only as an empirical
object of analysis, but can also be shown to be imagined in various ways,
and these imaginings have real consequences for the empirical object.
How ‘talk’ is imagined is part of what ‘talk’ is as an empirical object, the
phenomenon cannot be understood based only on what can be found on a
transcript, no matter how detailed (cf. Gaudio 2003).
To begin with, I warn that I am going to talk about ‘talk’ using an
especially dubious kind of conversational data that would probably
not pass muster in a positivistic discourse of the transparent, scientifi c
‘transcript’ of the ‘real conversation’. I will call such conversations
‘imagined conversations’ in spite of the fact that, like transcripts of ‘real
conversations’, both are embeddings of a primary genre (conversation) as
a Bakhtinian secondary genre within some other primary genre (internet
rant or scientifi c article) (for the opposition see Bakhtin 1986: 61–2). I
call them ‘imagined’ primarily to fl ag that such conversations might very
well be ‘made up’ (meaning anything from reconstructed from memory,
artfully retold, to entirely fabricated conversations) as opposed to ‘real’ (i.e.
transcribed from a recording of an actual conversation). Therefore, they
form, from a position of transcript-driven data purism, a dubious form
of data that allegedly cannot lead to any interesting insights on the ‘real’
phenomenon (e.g. Schegloff 1988: 100–4). But I also want to label them
‘imagined’ because by envisioning them we can attend to the imaginative
dimension of conversation, which is in its way every bit as ‘real’ as the stuff
in the transcripts. Certainly, they are real in their consequences. Moreover,
the very fact that they can be recognized as being of the same species as
the stuff in the transcripts shows that imaginary conversations really are
the same sort of thing as ‘real’ conversations in some way because they are
recognizable as such by members. 2
I explore these themes by looking at a very specifi c genre with a very
specifi c historical and cultural context, conversations reported by café
workers (henceforth baristas ) about ‘stupid customers’ in Starbucks coffee
stores, as reported on a barista website in a decidedly non-dialogic primary
speech genre that is usually called a ‘rant’ or a ‘vent’ (in my opinion a
very neglected speech genre), although these also bear some resemblance
to narrative genres like the anecdote. In such genres, a monologic primary
genre (‘rant’ or ‘vent’) consists almost entirely of an incorporated dialogic
interaction as a secondary genre. I’ll begin be reproducing an example of
such a genre, exactly as written on the website:
Yesterday I had an annoying customer experience I’d like to share. I’ll try
to remember the details as best as I can.
Stupid lady walks in.
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 37
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 37
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
38
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Me:
Hi, how are you?
Stupid: Yeah . . . can I get an . . . *mumbles inaudibly*
Me:
Excuse me, I didn’t catch that?
Stupid: *Looks at me like I’m an idiot* I’ll have a no-fat coffee.
Me:
I’m not quite sure what you mean.
Stupid: What do you mean? All you coffee places have no-fat coffee
drinks now, with all the new drinks you’re coming out with all
the time!
Me:
Well, if you want regular coffee, that doesn’t have fat to begin
with. Is that what you want?
Stupid: No! That has fat in it once you add the sugar and the whip’
cream and the fatty milk.
Me:
That doesn’t sound like you want a regular coffee, it sounds
like you’re talking about a latte.
Stupid: No! Once you add the latte or cappuccino it’s fatty.
Me:
Ma’am, latte’s and cappuccinos are drinks we offer. We can
make those nonfat if you’d like.
Stupid: Well what would you give to someone who came in and asked
for a no-fat coffee.
Me:
I wouldn’t give them anything until I fi gured out what a nonfat
coffee was. If you came in here and just asked for a regular
coffee, I would’ve given you a regular black coffee.
Stupid: No, I don’t want it black. *makes a face of disgust* I don’t
know how anyone could drink that stuff, it’s disgusting.
Me:
Did you want us to add milk?
Stupid: No, that makes it fatty.
Me:
Ma’am, we could make almost any drink on that half of the
menu with nonfat milk.
Stupid: What about her, *points to my coworker, Kristie* can she get
me a nonfat coffee?
Kristie: *notices Stupid is pointing to her* Excuse me, what can I get
for you?
Stupid: I want a nonfat coffee, and he doesn’t know what I’m talking
about, and I know all you coffee places have those nonfat
drinks now.
Kristie: Coffee is nonfat to begin with, I guess I don’t understand what
you’re asking for.
Stupid: *sighs loudly* I guess I’ll have to ask the manager about this.
Who’s the manager? 3
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 38
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 38
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:13 AM
COFFEE
39
These ‘stupid customer of the week’ stories, or SCOW stories, form a
mainstay of online interaction at one barista community website ( www.
livejournal.com/community/baristas/ ). I have found literally hundreds of
examples on this and other websites. They form part of a constellation
of genres that other viewers can post replies to, ranging from full-blown
SCOW stories, narratives of work problems not related as dialogs or not
involving customers, to chatty insider questions like ‘what does your
customer voice sound like: you know what I mean.’ I am interested in
why baristas imagine these conversations, what they use them for (other
than entertainment), and whether these imagined secondary speech
genres can tell us anything about the primary speech genre from which
they derive. This primary genre, the ‘rant’ or ‘vent’, is one that has come
into its own in the anonymous or pseudonymous discursive world of
the internet, a genre that ‘vents’ opinions that perhaps have no other
venue: they are hidden transcripts made visible. They are also ranting
monologues that can themselves produce dialogs, uptake or sharing
of similar experiences. These rants can take other non-dialog forms,
of course, mini-rants about customers like the following, which take
the form of a simple narrative (these are from http://starbucksgossip.
typepad.com/_/2005/07/its_time_for_st.html ). I warn you now that
strong language is involved:
[I hate it when] some cunty soccer mom indulges her bratty 8 year
old kid with a half-caf-double-decaf-breve-affogato-no-cream and the
brat changes his/her mind mid-drink and stares blankly at the board
trying to fi gure out what to order – with 9,000 people in line behind
them.
But even these narrative mini-rants have a tendency to slide into dialogic
format:
As a Barista, I used to hate Mr. Bitter old man who would say, ‘I’ll take
a coffee.’ And you’d say, ‘What size would you like?’, and he’d say in a
hostile and sarcastic-assed voice, ‘I’ll take a coffee. Just coffee.’ Like he
can’t understand the nerve of me asking him what size he wants. That
anything more than just ‘coffee’ is too foo-foo, like even what size it is.
So you’re getting a short decaf, jerk.
I am interested in why such a primary genre (‘rant’ or ‘vent’) should in the
case of a SCOW story involve simply a stretch of metapragmatic discourse,
using this term to mean simply ‘talk about talk’, in this case, a reported
conversation. Why, in particular, do websites addressed to communities
of Starbucks service workers (‘baristas’) have so many instances of this
genre?
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 39
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 39
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
40
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Ordering the way customers order coff ee:
From non-fat coff ee to half-caf-double-decaf-
breve-aff ogato-no-cream
Certainly, conversations with baristas at Starbucks are formidable for many.
Formulating the order correctly, even if not asking for a chimerical non-
fat coffee, represents for customers a kind of ‘trial’, a risky performance
which both the customer and the drink are defi ned (Latour 1999: 311,
Callon et al. 2002), which can produce conversational ‘troubles’ and
occasions for ‘repair’ (Sidnell 2007). Of course, any customer anywhere,
when making a request, must do so in such a way that the referent (the
good or service desired) is specifi cally and differentially picked out from all
the other potential referents in the contextual fi eld, a pragmatic problem
of ‘successful reference’ (e.g. Lyons 1977: 177). At Starbucks, however,
the fi eld of potential referents numbers into many thousands. A referring
expression that would get one coffee at a restaurant will only identify
the taxonomic fi eld at Starbucks. At the same time, Starbucks drinks,
affordable luxuries, are relatively prestigious quotidian commodities whose
consumption confers prestige on the consumer (see Roseberry (1996) for a
political–economic backdrop to the emergence of ‘Yuppie coffee’). Thus,
while successful reference is enough to get served, it is not enough to lay
claim to the prestigious properties of the object one is about to consume.
To do that, one must characterize the referent correctly (‘correct reference’
(Lyons 1977: 181)). The problem with ordering Starbucks coffee is that
the vocabulary of correct reference is enormous. The vocabulary fi eld
of affordable luxuries such as coffee has taken on some of the status-
indexing qualities associated with the vocabulary fi eld of pricier prestige
commodities, like wine or olive oil (Silverstein 2003: 226; 2006, Meneley
2007, Heath and Meneley 2007).
However, much as Starbucks coffee lingo self-consciously resembles
prestige registers of winespeak, there are enormous practical (and pragmatic)
differences. At Starbucks one must control a relatively standardized and
branded lexicon of distinction in reference to order the commodity from
a server, while in winespeak the lexicon of distinction is deployed in a
peer community of tasters to evaluate the commodity in consumption.
Winespeak is an evaluative lexicon of wine consumption, barista-speak is
a practical lexicon of coffee production. 4 Although there are ‘coffee-tasting
notes’ alongside ‘wine-tasting notes’ (Silverstein 2003: 227), there is no
problem of ‘successful reference’ in winespeak (the vocabulary is not used
to formulate an order), only ‘correct reference’. At Starbucks ‘successful
reference’ will allow one to get the drink one wants, but customers may
take different stances to the problem of ‘correct reference’, that is, not only
picking out the referent but also characterizing it correctly. In such trials
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 40
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 40
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
COFFEE
41
of reference, different kinds of customers, as well as different kinds of
drinks, are defi ned. Some customers (the ‘cunty soccer mom’ above) will
participate in the Starbucks branding strategy by using the Starbucks lingo
for ‘correct reference’, while others (‘Mr. Bitter old man’ above) will rebel
at it, attempting ‘successful’ but ostentatiously avoiding ‘correct reference’.
Part of Starbucks’ branding strategy relies on the idea that customers do
not just want coffee, they want ‘distinction’ (Bourdieu 1984, Silverstein
2003, 2006). Distinction is manufactured by the difference between
connoisseur-like fl uent control of ‘correct reference’ (‘half-caf-double-
decaf-breve-affogato-no-cream’) and plebeian ‘successful reference’.
5
Using the appropriate lexicon of distinction in proper reference ‘confers
(indexically entails) an aspect of eliteness-before-prestige-commodities, of
which “distinction” is made’ (Silverstein 2003: 226). Therefore, customer
class anxiety is foregrounded in a Starbucks service encounter to an extent
we would never fi nd in a Canadian Tim Hortons or its American equivalent,
Dunkin Donuts.
Unlike winespeak, Starbucks’ lexicon of distinction is standardized.
This standardization strategy appropriates portions of the terminology of
an antecedent coffee culture, refashioned as part of the Starbucks’ ‘brand’
of coffee reference (Ellis 2002; 2004: 253–8). So what constitutes ‘proper
reference’ at Starbucks is itself the product of a Starbucks’ brand strategy
that both appropriates existing Romance language lexicons of distinction
involving coffee drinks (Italian, French and Spanish coffee terminology are
redeployed (in that order) as part of a distinctive Starbucks’ register) and
adds additional brand-specifi c ones (including using Romance language
words as brand-specifi c names for sizes: ‘grande’ is the word for large, and
the even larger 20 oz is called ‘venti’). The resulting lexicon, represented in
a widely disseminated Starbucks’ ‘how to order guide’ (Starbucks 2003),
runs to many pages.
From the perspective of the Starbucks’ brand strategy, standardizing the
way baristas and customers refer to their beverages involves both a ‘stylistic’
discourse of distinction (associating the commodity with both brand-specifi c
and more general registers of distinction) as well as a ‘technical’ discourse
of effi ciency. The standardization of barista-speak involves aspects of
both branding and Taylorization, customer-oriented commoditization and
employee-oriented streamlining of the labour process. To borrow from
Deborah Cameron’s discussion of phone centres (Cameron 2000, 2008),
the Starbucks’ lexicon involves ‘styling’ (‘creating a uniform style of service
encounter by regulating small surface details that have aesthetic value’
(Cameron 2000: 101)) and ‘scripting’ the order of formulation to increase
effi ciency (Cameron 2000: 93–9). While the template for wine-tasting notes
mirrors the gustatory process of consumption, assessing the qualities of the
wine in the order in which they address the senses, moving from visual,
through olfactory, to gustatory (Silverstein 2003: 223–4), the Starbucks
ordering formula mirrors the process of production, the qualities of drinks
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 41
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 41
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
42
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
are stated in the order required by production, not consumption. The
syntax of winespeak is a diagrammatic icon of the process of consumption,
while the syntax of barista speak is an icon of production. Winespeak is
evaluative and non-standardizable, barista-speak is non-evaluative and
standardized.
As Cameron emphasizes, both ‘styling’ and ‘scripting’ are aspects of a
branding process involving notions of standardizing ‘quality’: on the one
hand, the conscious stylization of the process produces the uniqueness
of the brand, on the other hand, the scripting and surveillance of the
process ensures a uniform customer experience of the brand: ‘creating a
consistent, distinctive, and easily recognizable identity for . . . products and
services’ (Cameron 2000: 100). But unlike the call-centres that Cameron
discusses, both the barista and the customer are expected to participate in
the construction (via styling and scripting) of the consistent and distinctive
experience of the ‘Starbucks Brand’ (cf. Foster 2005, 2007 on the agencies
of producers and consumers in constructing brands). If in the call-centres
the consumer-oriented considerations of ‘service’ are in implicit confl ict
with the industrial considerations of ‘effi ciency’ (Cameron 2000: 103),
Starbucks represents both aspects of the process as being in the customers’
interests as well. Therefore, Starbucks has a ‘civilizing mission’ both with
respect to its workers and its customers: not only does Starbucks sends its
baristas to a special university to master the branded script for Starbucks
service encounters (see Laurier (2003), for an ethnography of the training
process at a European Starbucks competitor), but Starbucks has even gone
so far as to provide a script for such formulations for its customers in the
form of a widely disseminated guide to ordering at Starbucks (Starbucks
2003).
How to Order
If you’re nervous about ordering, don’t be.
There’s no ‘right’ way to order at Starbucks. Just tell us what you want
and we’ll give it to you.
But if we call your drink in a way that’s different from what you told us,
we’re not correcting you. We’re just translating your order into ‘barista-
speak’ – a standard way our baristas call out orders. This language gives
the baristas the info they need in the order they need it, so they can make
your drink as quickly and effi ciently as possible.
‘Barista-speak’ is easy to learn. It’s all about the order of information.
There are fi ve steps to the process. (Starbucks 2003: n.p.)
The pamphlet then gives a visual diagram of the production process for
a single order: (1) cup (a cup for hot, cold or ‘for here’ drinks), (2) shots
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 42
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 42
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
COFFEE
43
and size, (3) syrup, (4) milk and other modifi ers, (5) the (kind of) drink
itself. In principle, then, the descriptors for each of those categories are
to be formulated in the same order as they are needed in the production
process itself, so that the ‘correct’ order mirrors, or serves as an icon of,
the process of production. The Starbucks’ guide illustrates the Starbucks
syntax using the following example of a maximally complex coffee order
(Starbucks 2003):
I’d like to have an
iced, decaf, triple, grande, cinnamon,
nonfat, no-whip
mocha
cup
shots and size
syrup
milk and other modifiers the drink itself
1
2
3
4
5
In this pamphlet, Starbucks attempts to defuse the nervousness of the
customer in the face of the discourse of ‘styling’ and attendant distinction
by reassuring the customer that there is no ‘right way to order at Starbucks’
(hence, no distinction between successful and correct reference). The
pamphlet reassures the customer that the barista’s act of repeating the
customer’s order in Starbucks terminology and using Starbucks’ syntax is
not a face-threatening act of ‘correction’ (on the categories of correction in
conversation see Sidnell 2007) within a discourse of distinction (because,
after all the customer is always right) but a purely technical act of ‘translation’
to facilitate effi ciency, the expediter translating the customer’s ‘order’ into
a ‘call’ addressed to the barista (after all, everyone wants their coffee right
away, and there are other people in line too): ‘It’s all about the order of
information’. And this does appear to be true, a customer order , after all,
is a referential act of description of a thing (a specifi c good or product),
but this thing does not actually exist until it is made by the barista, so
it must be translated into a call , which is a description of a service or a
labour process of making that thing. To paraphrase Eric Laurier’s excellent
ethnography of barista training, customers immerse baristas ‘in the fi eld of
action with their orders’ (2003: 13). The arcana of the Starbucks ordering
process is revealed to be not an invidious social discourse of distinction, but
a technical craft knowledge related to industrial effi ciency, used for effi cient
communication between fellow skilled workers, which the customers are
invited to participate in: ‘This language gives the baristas the info they
need in the order they need it, so they can make your drink as quickly
and effi ciently as possible’ (Starbucks 2003). The baristas, it appears from
reading the SCOW stories, largely agree. One way a customer can be ‘stupid’
is not merely that they do not know how to talk about coffee, or wilfully
refuse to do so (‘correct reference’), but also that they refuse to allow the
barista to ‘repair’ their order so that the order can be fi lled (‘successful
reference’).
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 43
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 43
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
44
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Enter the stupid customer:
The antinomies of talk at work
But anxious customers are probably right about one thing, their fumbled
orders will make them seem stupid. This brings me to the next question
about imagined conversations at Starbucks: Why specifi cally is the best
way to rant about a stupid customer at Starbucks simply to reproduce
the conversation with that customer? It is surely important here that the
kind of talk that is being imagined is a ‘service transaction’, a kind of talk
that is imagined to be in certain ways different from ‘ordinary’ talk-in-
interaction (Silverstein 2003: 199). For example, in a service transaction
there are technical goals that must be accomplished (orders must be made
so that they can be fi lled) and at the same time there are signifi cant social
asymmetries between interactants (‘the customer is always right’).
For workers in the infl uential fi eld of Conversation Analysis (for a
recent survey see Sidnell 2007), there is a sense in which ‘ordinary talk
between peers’ plays the unmarked ‘plain vanilla’ role to the more robustly
fl avoured ‘institutional talk’: unmarked in the sense that they are opposed
as ‘everyday conversation between peers’ (unmarked) versus ‘institutional
talk’ (marked), in that the latter involves various forms of institutional
constraints and goals that are absent (one supposes) from purely sociable
interaction between peers (Drew and Heritage 1992: 21–2). Presumably,
this can imply that ‘ordinary talk between peers’ is closer to instantiating
the properties of the universal category of ‘talk-in-interaction’. However,
at the same time, both of these are subsumed as specifi c genres of the
universalizing category of ‘talk-in-interaction’ or ‘verbal exchanges in
general’ (Drew and Heritage 1992: 4). So, in a sense, sociable talk between
peers is ambivalently elided into ‘natural, non-genred’ talk (in effect, closer
to the universal category of ‘talk-in-interaction’), while institutional talk
is ‘genred’ by virtue of having extrinsic constraints and goals located in
the institutional, and not interactional, order (for a critique see Gaudio
2003).
To be fair, Drew and Heritage present the opposition between ‘ordinary’
and ‘institutional’ talk in terms of the above-mentioned factors as part
of the ‘
participants’ orientations to institutional contexts’ (1992: 4,
original emphasis). They are surely right that both analysts and members
would probably agree that in service transactions talk becomes part
of the institutional domain of work, a domain in which, among other
things, there are confl icting imperatives between ordinary sociability
and technical necessity, politeness and getting the job done. Talk at work
seems in general ways to be imagined as being different from ordinary
talk, as being constrained rather than free, transactional rather than
interactional, oriented to technical necessities, effi ciency, getting the job
done, getting the customer their coffee, rather than pure unencumbered
sociability.
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 44
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 44
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
COFFEE
45
Evidently Starbucks’ service interactions are a special breed even here,
in that the class anxieties of the customer are ramifi ed by the Starbucks’
branding and scripting of its special transactional style. For the barista,
too, there are interactional dilemmas represented in these conversations
deriving from the institutional context. The responsibility a barista has to
both fi gure out the order of the customer (a problem of successful reference)
and maintain a scripted Starbucks’ ‘brand’ of ordering (a problem of
correct reference) provides a common interactional motif in these imagined
conversations. In the following rant, the stupid customer speaks in fl uent
Tim Hortonsese (where, apparently, ‘regular’ means ‘with cream and
sugar’) and McDonaldsese’ (‘supersize’), and seems to think that ‘regular’
coffee is the same as a ‘cream and sugar’, but balks at using the branded
terminology of Starbucks:
Me:
Hi, What can I get for you today, sir?
Man: A
small
Me:
You would like a tall what sir?
Man:
I said I want a small
Me:
Would that be a tall coffee sir?
Man:
No I want a small regular, I don’t want to supersize my drink.
Me:
No sir, tall is small. Here at Starbucks small is tall, medium is
grande and large is venti.
Man:
Well what I want is a small.
Me:
Okay, tall traditional it is *grinding teeth* *get him the drink
and give it to him*
Man:
*Takes off the lid* I thought I told you I wanted a small
regular. This is just black.
Me:
Sir, you can fi nd milk and sugar for your coffee over at the
condiment bar. We have various types of dairy for your coffee
and also many different types of sweetners.
Man:
What I want is a regular small coffee. Why can’t you do this
for me? Is that too hard for you? At what I am paying for
a cup of coffee you should be able to put the milk and two
spoonfuls of sugar in for me.
Me:
Well sir, here at Starbucks we feel that you are better served by
arranging your coffee however you like. That will be $1.52.
Man:
Are you sure? I can’t get this for free being that it has taken
over 5 minutes just to get me a small coffee and ring me up?
Me:
I am sorry that took so long. That will be a dollar and 52 cents
for your TALL TRADITIONAL cup of coffee.
Why oh why do we have to go through this EVERY FREAKING
DAY!!! Why!!!! 6
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 45
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 45
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
46
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
These rants about conversations are also interesting because they show
a much more general observation about how conversations are imagined
in our society, by analysts and members alike. Even within sometimes
universalizing perspectives like Conversation Analysis, service interactions
are sometimes treated as a ‘special’ or ‘marked’ form of talk because of
the way in which technical or institutional considerations extrinsic to
the ‘natural’ interactional order of pure conversation overdetermine
that conversational order. Hence, they can be opposed as a special case
to the more general category of conversation without such determining
institutional or technical factors, ‘non-businesslike’ conversation between
peers pursued ‘for its own sake’, conversation as Simmel’s ‘pure sociability’
(Simmel 1949). As Gaudio summarizes this ideology of sociability, freedom
from external constraint plays an important role in the semiotic ideology
constituting this privileged domain of the ‘casual conversation’:
In the U.S. and other Western societies, scholarly and popular ideologies
alike posit casual conversation as an activity that depends on various
states of ‘freedom.’ Participants should ideally be (i) social equals, free of
institutional hierarchies and constraints; (ii) free to talk, not busy with
work or other tasks that might limit their time or attention; and (iii)
situated in a place where they feel protected, at least temporarily, from
forces that might encroach on these freedoms. (2003: 669–70)
As Gaudio notes, Starbucks markets itself as precisely the place where
such pure unconstrained and unencumbered sociability in the form of
casual conversation can take place, modern day Habermasian coffee
shops or Oldenbergian ‘third places’ between work and home, public
and private, where one can talk over a cup of coffee with friends.
Gaudio shows various dimensions that this ‘naturalized confl ation of
conversation with the commercialized consumption of coffee’ elides
important ways that such apparently natural ‘coffeetalk’ is ‘inextricably
implicated in the political, economic and cultural-ideological processes
of global capitalism’ (2003: 659).
While Gaudio usefully frames an important aspect of the Starbucks’
‘branding’ of both coffee and talk within broader political–economic
contexts (see also Roseberry 1996), it seems to me that if one wants to fi nd
interactions shot through with political–economic moment at Starbucks,
surely one needs to look no further than the bar, for a Starbucks store has
far more transactional ‘talk about coffee’ than it does sociable ‘coffeetalk’.
And the commoditization, stylization and standardization, in short, the
branding of the process of ordering Starbucks’ coffee is surely just as
salient as the branding of Starbucks’ stores as ‘third spaces’ for sociable
dialog. The extent that analysts and members both tend to oppose talk
to work, pure sociability between peers to asymmetries between server
and customer, the normative order of interaction to the technical order
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 46
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 46
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:14 AM
COFFEE
47
of transaction, these service transactions seem to be an exceptional form
of talk. It is precisely this perceived hybrid quality of service interactions,
containing determinations both of a technical, work-related, and a social,
politeness-related, nature, that are part of the problems surfacing in these
reported conversations: technical failings of communication, which prevent
the closure of the transaction, routinely become normative threats to face.
Talk at work illustrates at once the opposition and the interpenetration of
the technical and normative orders (see Hutchby 2001a for a fascinating
exploration of other aspects of the interpenetration of normative and
technical orders in technologically mediated conversations).
I want to argue that baristas rants are informed by two separate ideal
models of talk. One of these is a technical script based on craft knowledge
possessed by the baristas which contradicts the notion that ‘the customer
is always right’. The other is a normative egalitarian model of talk
between peers in which the barista also deserves the same treatment as
is normatively expected by customers. The dystopian quasi-feudal world
of ‘service’ is critiqued both from the perspective of a extrinsic script of
technical effi ciency (which posits the barista as a skilled worker relative
to the ignorant customer) as well as a normative model of egalitarian
conversation between peers (in which the barista lays claim to the same
social properties of abstract equality in public already enjoyed by all
customers, even stupid ones).
The rant of the skilled service worker:
Skilled baristas and stupid customers
‘Talk’ is something that members talk about, and part of members’
defi nition of talk, is that talk at work is not a very good example of talk.
Reproducing dialogs with stupid customers (SCOW stories) illustrate what
is wrong with service work in general, and therefore counts as a ‘rant’.
The normative model of ordinary conversation between equals – never
achievable in the institutional context because ‘the customer is always
right’ – forms a normative position of critique against which SCOW service
interactions are implicitly evaluated. At the same time, the transactional
order of effi ciency and following the script also forms a position of critique,
allowing the unrepairable idiocy of the customers’ fumbled order for non-
existent goods and services to be recognizable as obvious stupidity, when
compared to the technical craft knowledge of the barista.
SCOW stories, as a kind of imagined conversation, are at fi rst glance
somewhat different from the kinds of imagined conversations studied by
Burke (1993). The imagined conversations found in Renaissance manner
books going under the title of ‘the art of conversation’ are paradigmatic
models for imitation, print culture images of speech that in turn have
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 47
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 47
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
48
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
effects on spoken culture (in a sense no different from the scripts found
in Cameron’s discussion (2008) of ‘top-down talk’). Such imagined
conversations had four properties in particular that resemble those of the
modern imagined ‘casual conversation’:
What makes this genre [conversation] distinctive is the relative emphasis
on a cluster of characteristics, four in particular. There is fi rst ‘the
cooperative principle’ . . . second, the equal distribution of ‘speaker
rights’, expressed through an emphasis on turn-taking and . . . a
‘reciprocal interchange of ideas’; third, the spontaneity and informality
of the exchanges; and fi nally . . . their ‘non-business-likeness’. (Burke
1993: 91)
And of course, these four features of the emergent consensus of how to
characterize conversation in Europe listed by Burke are clearly normative
features carried over into the contemporary semiotic ideology of ‘casual
conversation’ presented by Gaudio above. When we imagine dialog, these
are the features that we imagine dialog to have, even if they are often absent
from real talk. They are the characteristics that mark a ‘good conversation’.
The model of conversation that emerges from such normative images of
conversation is an idealized one, a model to aspire to. Simmel (1949)
treats the art of conversation as pure sociability, as a special historical
achievement, that differs from the normal conversation that is shot through
with instrumentality and not always pursued for its own sake. Habermas
(1991), by contrast, treats such conversation between peers as a normative
locus for a particular kind of rational political deliberation, which is not
instrumental inasmuch as ‘the political’ is pursued as a self-valuable end in
itself.
Such is the vision of talk that is unconstrained and pursued as an end
in itself, the normative model of talk which in many important respects
is coextensive with the analytic category of talk that is sometimes called
‘ordinary conversation’. Imagined conversations that take this form can
serve as positive normative models for talk. But the conversations I have
reproduced above are neither imaginary conversations that involve pure
sociability, nor are they positive models. They are representations of a kind
of talk, service interactions, which has not been seen as being empirically
or normatively central to our imagining of conversation. Moreover, they
are representations of specifi cally bad conversations of this type. I want to
argue that these two things are not related by chance, rather, it is specifi cally
because they are service interactions that leads to the kind of conversation
that is imagined and reproduced in the context of a rant for normative
evaluation be one in which the norms are broken, rather than obeyed.
In order to understand ‘service interactions’ we need to understand
‘service’. Service has often been treated as an unproblematic given in our
society, lumped together in the collocation ‘goods and services’, it is usually
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 48
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 48
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
COFFEE
49
assumed that we know what it is without a defi nition (Manning 2006).
Again, like other terms, such as ‘talk’ and ‘work’ (and I might add ‘social’
and ‘technical’) it has a kind of spurious concreteness, undefi ned except
by a kind of ostensive ‘you know it when you see it’ sort of defi nition.
As the very name suggests, service resembles a residual feudal holdover
into capitalist societies, a hybrid form of work characterized, among other
things, by the fact that it is not mediated by goods or commodities. Unlike
the stereotypical model of production, service work is not mediated by
objects which are created as products in a separate sphere of production
and then move to a market, there confronting the consumer as autonomous
commodities. Service produces no autonomous durable product and is
therefore literally ‘unproductive’ (Manning 2006, Steedman 2007: 73).
In the hybrid domain of service, the spheres of production, exchange and
consumption are not kept separate, but confounded (Steedman 2007: 72–3).
In spite of the fact that service was at the time, and still is, the dominant
form of work under capitalism (Steedman 2007: 74), Marx was one of
many who could not see this type of work as being essential to capitalism:
‘types of work that are consumed as services and not in products separable
from the worker, and not capable of existing as commodities independently
of him . . . are of microscopic signifi cance when compared with the mass of
capitalist production’ (Marx 1887, 574).
The motion of goods (commodities) as mediators keeps the ontological
domains of production, exchange and consumption separate, more
importantly, they keep immediate producers separate from consumers.
For Marx, in an oft-cited quote in the Grundrisse, the spatio-temporal
dimension of circulation is the fi nal portion of the production process,
the ‘locational movement’ of the product to the market is not only what
fi nishes the production process, it is precisely what transforms products
into commodities. 7 This means that in ‘unproductive’ service labour, the
spheres normatively kept apart in the circulation of goods (commodities) are
brought face to face: the producer meets the consumer directly, hence the
barista is at once a producer of a commodity and a server of a customer. In
the former domain the barista is the expert, the skilled worker attempting to
make a product which has its own technical demands, in the latter domain
the customer is king, whose knowledge and desires are absolute and whose
order must be met at all costs. The mediation of the product/commodity is
also the source of the autonomy of the skilled worker (compare Manning
2002).
Like the Starbucks baristas who take them, the very speech act called an
‘order’ is a sociotechnical hybrid belonging simultaneously to two strongly
opposed ontological domains: on the one hand, an autonomous technical
domain of production in which there are correct ways of referring to things
(basically, here, descriptions of how to make them), and there are expert
speakers, baristas, who even if they do not correct the customer directly,
will still display their relative expertise indirectly when they ‘call’ the order
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 49
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 49
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
50
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
to another expert; on the other hand, this is a service encounter, in which
the customer either wants to display their command of correct reference
to these same objects as an index of prestige, or, having fumbled their
order, at least does not want to be corrected by a (mere) server. A similar
hybridity is found depending on whether we think of an order as an act of
reference (neutral description of an object) or as a command (directed at
the server, as the etymology suggests). The model of ‘reference’ foregrounds
the relationship between an object and an expert speaker (barista), while
the model of ‘order’ as something to elicit obedience foregrounds the
relationship between a customer (feudal lord manqué) and server (feudal
servant). The prototypical model for the former domain of autonomous and
correct reference would be something like the linguistic division of labour
envisioned by Putnam (1975: 227–8) in which there are some words (natural
kind terms like ‘gold’ or ‘elm’) which exhibit a linguistic division of labour
such that there are expert speakers (scientists) who can authoritatively use
these words in correct reference to the corresponding objects, while the rest
of the speakers who use these words depend on these speakers’ authoritative
acts of reference. The prototypical model for the latter domain of service
transaction is the world of commercial speech in which neither experts
nor objects have any voice, and all the actors are humans: customers are
assumed to know what they want and are always right, and the job of
the server is to obey the orders of the customer, however whimsical or
capricious.
What is true of ‘service’ is true of ‘service transactions’, which enter into
the literature in pragmatics as if one could talk about them without any
further specifi cation of, say, what the service was, or where (compare the
very different treatment of the same transcript in Levinson (1983: 305),
where the fact that it is a service transaction is not mentioned, with that
in Silverstein (2003: 198–201)). Obviously, I have been arguing here that
Starbucks service interactions are imagined implicitly as being different
from those at Tim Hortons or Dunkin Donuts (even if servers apparently
have rant-worthy grievances against customers, and vice versa, at all these
establishments). And clearly, corporate efforts to subordinate the ‘locally
managed’ labour process of talk to extrinsic forms of technological or
social labour discipline (as discussed by Cameron 2008) indicate that the
service encounter is anything but an unproblematic given any more than
the ‘talk’ or ‘work’ that service seems to nearly always involve are.
But if the service interaction (ordering a coffee) can fi gure as the very
opposite of the unencumbered freedom that characterizes sociable talk
that happens after the coffee is received, it can also serve as a fi gure
for something very similar to sociability. That is, in a manner that
parallels classic sociological discussions of sociability (Simmel 1949),
it can serve as a crucial example of certain basic ways that liberal civil
society problematically achieves the emancipation of interaction from the
encumbrances of status inequality. The service interaction is not only a place
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 50
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 50
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
COFFEE
51
where the fundamental equality of words and things, verbal and non-verbal
activities, within sequences is demonstrated (Goffman 1976: 283), but also
a place in which we can see the fundamental achievement of liberal civil
society, that of the micro-ecological equality of the customer is routinely
achieved: ‘Participants in service transactions can feel that all externally
relevant attributes are being held in abeyance and only internally generated
ones are allowed to play a role, e.g. fi rst come, fi rst served’ (Goffman
1983: 15). Since liberalism works on a quasi-technical procedural basis, it’s
worth noting that such equal treatment is also regarded to be technically
more effi cient:
In almost all contemporary service transactions, a basic understanding
seems to prevail: that all candidates for service will be treated ‘the same’
or ‘equally’, none being favoured or disfavoured over the others. . . . All
things considered, this ethic provides a very effective formula for the
routinization and processing of services. (Goffman 1983: 14)
Given that standing in line and being treated the same as every other
customer is in a sense a procedural enactment of liberal equality, it is
common enough for those who are being served to sustain serious senses
of injury because of perceiving different ways that they have not received
equality and courtesy in fair and equal measures. This is because the
service interaction, like other forms of conversation, seems to instantiate
for us the basic formal procedural principles of liberal egalitarianism and
freedom procedurally, within the form of the interaction itself. Precisely in
such contexts being treated in the proper manner as a customer one enacts
and displays the basic achievements of liberalism as one’s own personal
attributes, as Horkheimer puts it: ‘Even the man in the street experienced
in the act of buying a little of his own freedom and of respect for himself
as subject’ (1974).
But unlike non-businesslike conversation, ordinary conversation
between peers, in service transactions the customer is only equal to all the
other customers: there is no corresponding sense of equality for the server.
As Horkheimer suggests, the basic categories of bourgeois liberalism are
simply feudal categories that have been transposed and universalized: The
customer is simply the feudal lord writ large, equal to other customers
as peers, standing in a relation of absolute ruler to the server. ‘Bourgeois
culture was deeply infl uenced by the dignity, honor, and freedom of the
feudal lord and, in the last analysis, of the absolute ruler; it transferred
these attributes to every individual man and especially to anyone who
was well-off’ (Horkheimer 1974). And again, an irony of liberalism is
that, unlike feudalism, the persistence of hierarchy and domination are
not necessarily to be explained in naturalized relations between estates or
embodied, inherited, social status attributes or relations, but rather ‘are
its freely adopted form’ (Horkheimer 1974). That is, the unfreedom of the
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 51
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 51
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:15 AM
52
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
workplace is freely chosen. No one forces you to work (at any specifi c job ),
and the unfreedom of work as a server is compensated by the freedom as a
consumer during leisure.
In service work, of course, this unfreedom involves as it were, a double
subordination, not merely the subordination of the worker to the employer,
but also, in service transactions, the subordination of server to customer (a
problem explored in detail by Cameron 2000, Laurier 2003). If the role of
customer is simply the feudal status of the lord writ large, so the role of server
is simply the feudal status of servant transposed from a relation of status to
one of contract: ‘But where such a person did buy, he was served, and the
reference to a bygone servant-relationship which the very word ‘Service’
implies was not without infl uence on the manner in which the simple act
of buying and selling was performed’ (Horkheimer 1974). Indeed, the basic
principles of equality and courtesy that Goffman treats as being the basic, if
problematic, achievements of the service encounter, which efface the feudal
status attributes of class, race, gender, age, and replace them with a locally
managed liberal equality of persons with respect to the line and the server,
are achieved by a generalized quasi-feudal subordination, of course, of the
server to customers in general: ‘The principle which every employer tried
to drum into salesmen and salesgirls – “The customer is always right” –
derives in substance from the time of the absolute ruler’ (Horkheimer
1974). Between customers the aristocratic equality of peers holds just in
case all servers are autocratically subordinated to each customer in turn
as servant to autocratic ruler. The following SCOW story illustrates the
latently aristocratic character of the category of ‘customer’ and the fact that
‘being a customer’ is a contingent and problematic ‘achievement’:
Today after my shift ended I decided to do some christmas shopping.
I pick up large 4 bottles of various fl avoured syrup and 4 lbs of whole
bean coffee. I am standing at the register as the partner is ringing me in.
I am the only one in the store. This woman walks in and stand behind
me, waiting to be rung up. Our store is 10 years old and the registers are
pretty slow sometimes. After waiting about 1 1/2 minutes the following
occurs:
Woman:
You know, you could ask me what I want
(directed at me, and the other partners)
Register Partner (shocked): I’m sorry, I’ll be with you in a minute
Woman:
Thats really rude, you’re standing here
laughing and joking and doing nothing
and you don’t even ask me what i want
(more towards me now) I’m a customer!
Me:
I’m a customer, too
Woman:
No you’re not, you work here
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 52
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 52
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
COFFEE
53
Register Partner:
What can I get for you (to the bitch)
Woman:
You’re in starbucks clothes (to me, ignoring
the register partner asking for her drink)
Me:
I’m off the clock, and I’m a customer just like
you. Anyhow, you don’t have to be so rude
Woman:
I’m not being rude, I think this is messed up,
you’re all messing around, laughing and joking,
you need to wait on me
Off the clock partner:
(not in uniform) Whats wrong? Did I miss
something??
Me:
No, This lady thinks that 2 minutes is too
long to wait for her coffee. (as i walk away,
transaction complete)
Woman:
(still hasn’t ordered) It was longer than 2
minutes, more like 10 minutes, blah blah blah
Off the clock partner:
What happened?
Me:
Nothing, that lady is just a bitch. 8
Once the basic identifi cation of who is a ‘customer’ and who is a ‘server’
has been achieved, the principle that the customer is always right, of course,
is usually a central problem in these Starbucks narratives. Because it is the
presupposition that the customer is always right even if factually wrong that
produces the inability of the barista to repair or redress the unsuccessful
orders of the customers. This in turn leads to many problems, some of them
technical, some of them normative.
From a technical point of view, an order must be formulated for
something that exists, and this formulation must be made in an intelligible
fashion. These are problems of successful reference. If neither of these
things happens, the barista has little choice but to attempt some sort of
repair, either by adding new turns at talk for clarifi cation, or, by simply
translating the order into something that is an intelligible formulations.
The story I started with, the request for ‘non-fat coffee’, is an illustration
of this sort of thing. Since ‘successful reference’ appears to belong more or
less to the ‘technical requirements’ of communication and getting the job
done, we might classify this sort of repair under the rubric of the technical
order.
But the technical order is at the same time a normative one: here it is
important to note that baristas are skilled workers, and technical skill is a
matter which can command social prestige or distinction. Thus, imaginary
conversations that highlight such technical problems are ones in which the
customer is simply wrong, or is not communicating, but they are always
assessed by reference to the craft knowledge of the barista about products
and the knowledge of more effi cient scripts for getting an order done. In
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 53
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 53
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
54
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
essence, in some of them the customer is simply stupid, but in other cases
the barista is making a claim to craft knowledge, skill, and a concomitant
meritocratic or technocratic claim to respect due a person who has superior
craft knowledge, claims very similar to those that have historically formed
the basis for claims to distinction, respect and autonomy at work in non-
service industries (e.g. Quam-Wickham 1999, Manning 2001, 2002, 2004).
Starbucks employees (at least on the website in question) view themselves as
being skilled workers , who take pride in their work, and part of their skill
is displayed in their command of craft terminology (a craft terminology
which is also ‘sold’ as a branded commodity to the customer as part of a
distinctive Starbucks service encounter). This is a claim to distinction based
in the world of production which is somewhat different from the claims to
distinction made in connoisseur consumption, for example, by a yuppie
consumer, though both display this property in similar acts of reference to
Starbucks’ products, so in the end the order itself becomes a sociotechnical
hybrid, a battleground between barista claims to craft expertise and
consumer claims to connoisseurship. As an example of this, we fi nd that as
Starbucks’ baristas become customers, they may, in the process of giving
an order slowly and carefully, treat a working barista as being a relatively
unskilled worker, as in this entry labelled ‘rant!’:
Weirdest customer tonight . . .
A girl comes through drive through and I take her order . . . and she says
it REALLY slow.
Crazy girl: I want a grande . . .
. . . 3 pumps white chocolate . . . this is going to confuse you i can already
tell . . .
half pump mocha . . . and extra hot!
Me: Okay, so that was a grande, half pump mocha, extra hot, 3 pump
white mocha?
CG: Yeah, that sounds right!
Me: Okay, you’re total is $x.xx, see you at the window!
CG: Oh, wait I have partner numbers, hon!
Me: Alright, I’ll take those when you get to the window.
So she gets to the window, and isn’t even LOOKING in my direction,
she’s staring at the passenger side fl oor. I’m expecting to get older
numbers (older than 144 i mean) and when I ask, she tells me 147.
And I’m thinking, 147. you’ve been here less time than i have. unless
she’s a rehire . . . either way, what the HELL . . . she was treating me
like a child when she was on speaker/at window. And then she starts
asking questions about who my manager is . . . blahblah . . . and she was
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 54
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 54
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
COFFEE
55
actually looking for the manager of the Starbucks down the street a few
blocks.
At any rate, I was annoyed because she obviously WORKS for Starbucks,
so she should know that we’re capable of taking ‘complicated’ orders at a
rate much faster than molasses. 9
As we have seen above, many or most stupid customer stories seem to
revolve around unsuccessful reference of various kinds and valiant but futile
barista attempts at repair, as the attempted technical repair of the customer
order by the server (to achieve ‘successful reference’) is taken to be a face-
threatening ‘correction’. The irony of Starbucks is, of course, that many
customers resent or resist the fact that the barista, on one level a low-paid
service worker, is in some sense more classy, sophisticated, winespeakier in a
techne of distinction, than they are. The Starbucks ordering scene involves a
basic role-reversal when compared to the ordinary service encounter. Rather
than an aristocratic customer to whom is imputed universal knowledge
of commodities and a server who merely fulfi ls that desire, the customer
confronts the Starbucks barista as an aristocrat manqué, someone desiring
the distinction of a connoisseur but where the server is actually the possessor
and arbiter of taste and distinction. So in some sense a Starbucks barista’s
position with respect to the customer is not like a normal low end service
employee and more like a high end connoisseur, a chef, a wine expert,
sommelier, interior designer (Laurier 2003). This intimidates customers
who are anxious and unsure of their knowledge, leading to resistance and
resentment when the expediter ‘corrects’ their successful order (a matter
of routine when ‘calling’ the order to the barista) or attempts repair on an
unsuccessful one. But, the situation is different because, after all, Starbucks
baristas really are relatively low end service employees (service work, skilled
or not, historically always seemingly defi ning the low end of any labour
hierarchy) and cannot take the high line as easily as, for example, a chef.
The sociotechnical domain and ‘shifters’
And, indeed, Starbucks baristas are frequently treated as being deskilled
automatons when compared to real Italian craft workers, as in this excerpt
by a noted anthropologist, who seemingly reproduces the very ‘global
hierarchy of value’ which he himself criticizes elsewhere (Herzfeld 2003) in
which Italy fi gures as the prestigious source of the real and authentic ‘slow
food’ by comparison with which all automated culinary modernist ‘fast food’
imitators like Starbucks are equally tawdry perversions (see Meneley 2004):
Think, for example, of the Italian barista, who almost simultaneously
prepares several cups of expresso, hauls down bottles of liquor and
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 55
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 55
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
56
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
measures out a couple of glasses, stows used crockery in a miniature
counter-top dishwasher, and banters with his customers while watching
out for potential thieves and troublemakers. By contrast, in virtually any
American chain coffee-house such as Starbucks a beep announces that
one of the carefully measured amounts of variously complicated espresso-
based hot drinks is ready for pouring into a pre-marked cup, while the
employee at the case register calls out, ‘One doppio for here’, eliciting
the well-trained response, ‘One for-here doppio!’ A very successful
Gesellschaft has brought Max Weber and Henry Ford together in an
Italianate coffee-shop. But the original Italian model that this staging
purports to imitate still effortlessly reproduces Gemeinschaft amid the
swirl of congested traffi c and incessant cyber-chatter. Both are rituals;
but one embodies sociability, while the other celebrates automation.
(Herzfeld 2007: 207) 10
To rhetorically polarize baristas into two camps, skilled Italians and
deskilled American barista-bots, one needs to look past the fact that the
skills and technologies used in each process are essentially identical. Laurier
(2003), for example, gives a detailed ethnographic depiction of the complex
skill set of the average chain barista , all of whom, after all use the same
or similar equipment and techniques as the idealized Italian. After all, as
the name itself suggests, espresso is the actual prototype for the culinary
modernist order of industrial fast food! The postwar chromium Italian
espresso machine which served as ‘ambassadors of modernism’ along with
the décor of the cafes (Ellis 2004: 230), along with the modern forms of
sociability these afforded (Ellis 2004: 233), somehow become assigned to
a traditional human milieu of culinary luddism and ‘rituals of sociability’
when in Italy, the non-human milieu of culinary modernism and ‘rituals of
automation’ when in an American strip mall.
One simple take-away point is the rhetorical opposition between craft
‘skill’ (culinary luddism: technique embodied in humans) and industrial
‘technology’ (culinary modernism: technique embodied in non-humans), or
‘tradition’ and ‘modernity’, is a ‘shifter’, a duplex (referential and indexical)
term or opposition whose reference changes in part according to indexical
contextual features of time and place (on ‘shifters’ and skill as a ‘shifter’ see
Manning 2004: 532–5). Once upon a time industrial modernists celebrated
‘the human motor’ (Rabinbach 1990), but now that this modernism itself
is out of fashion, modernist technologies must be reassigned to the human
world of artisanal craftsmanship to retain favour.
But as Gal argues with respect to the ‘public’/‘private’ distinction, treating
oppositions as being contextually ‘shifty’ does not really do justice to the
semiotics of these oppositions (2002: 82), which in fact operate as a series
of nested oppositions in which the same opposition applies recursively :
A familiar, everyday example of how this works is the common
conceptualization of American, bourgeois domestic space. At a fi rst look,
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 56
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 56
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
COFFEE
57
the privacy of the house itself contrasts with the public character of the
street around it. If we focus, however, on the inside of the house, then
the living room becomes the public, that is, the public part of a domestic
private space. Thus the public/private distinction is reapplied and now
divides into public and private what was, from another perspective,
entirely ‘private’ space. (Gal 2002: 82)
Thus, as Gal argues, rather than treat these oppositions as single dichotomies
with fl uid boundaries, it is often better to model them in this way as nested,
recursive oppositions. I would suggest the same applies to oppositions
like ‘social’ and ‘technical’. Here, the human confronts the non-human as
social to technical, but recursively defi nes the opposition between skilled
‘artisanal’ and deskilled ‘industrial’ work: the ‘social’ world of the skilled
craft worker (where the machine is an organic extension of the human)
or the ‘technical’ world of the deskilled industrial worker (where the
worker is a mechanical extension of the machine). But the same opposition
recursively defi nes conversation, too, say, the opposition between the
sociable banter of the barista in interaction with human customers (social)
and the technical skill of the barista displayed in acts of reference to coffee,
or even the social versus the technical aspects of conversation itself: for
example, it is reproduced recursively in Goffman’s invidious distinction
between ‘ritual constraints’ (the kind of things that, he suggests, well-
trained sociologists like himself, following Durkheim, should attend to)
and ‘systemic constraints’ (the kinds of things Conversation Analysts
attend to), which deal ‘with talk as a communications engineer might,
somewhat optimistic about the possibility of a culture-free formulation’
(1976: 265, see also Hutchby 2001a for a useful overview of the opposition
between, and interpenetration of, ‘normative’ and ‘technical’ models of
conversation). And just as Goffman seeks to locate conversation within a
purifi ed Durkheimian model of the social with his talk of ‘ritual constraints’,
so the literature of Conversation Analysis is fi lled with a technomorphic
terminology of ‘technical resources’, ‘technology’, ‘machinery’ and ‘repair’
(Hutchby 2001a).
Taking this semiotic point about recursion provided by Gal, we can
connect this point to an observation by Latour that the opposition between
the social and the technical glosses over a series of (recursive, nested)
exchanges between humans and non-humans. Rather than denoting a shifty
hybrid ‘sociotechnical’ sphere where everything is social and technical
at once, Latour argues, the term ‘sociotechnical’ denotes a domain of
exchange between humans and non-humans: ‘that which has been learned
from nonhumans and reimported into the social realm, that which has
been rehearsed in the social realm and exported back to the nonhumans’
(1999: 212–13). New technologies indeed ‘deskill’ workers but they also
elicit new skills (non-human → human), skills in turn are delegated to or
embedded in technologies (human → non-human). In these translations and
delegations there is a series of alternations between technomorphism and
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 57
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 57
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
58
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
anthropomorphism (Latour 1992). At each stage in this system of exchanges,
the opposition between ‘social’ and ‘technical’ takes on a different sense,
which explains how the terms act as ‘shifters’, how individual referents can
move back and forth between the two categories, in a set of exchanges that
dynamically mirrors the semiotics of recursion that Gal argues for.
On a conversational level, too, the act of ordering is one where things
can shift their position from the technical to the social, one might say
that the problem of service work is maintaining an autonomous order of
technical reference from the dominant encompassing semiotic ideology
of commercial speech (see Manning 2002 for comparable example in a
very different industry). This generates a common interactional impasse: A
customer formulates an order, making successful but not proper reference
to a drink, and the expediter either repeats this order or calls out this order
(to the barista) in ‘correct form’. This sounds like a ‘repair’, however, and
the worst (most ‘dispreferred’) kind of repair, other-initiated other-repair
(Levinson 1983: 341), which appears to be cross-culturally associated
with threats to face (Sidnell 2007: 239). The customer now feels aggrieved
because as a customer, they are always right, but distinction at Starbucks
is manufactured precisely by the difference between successful and correct
reference, and here the barista always has the advantage and is always the
arbiter. Mutual resentment can only result, as in this example, where the
drink order is in fact completely unintelligible:
Next up: Middle aged couple.
i’m expediting at this point, and I’m calling the line and I get to them.
Man:
‘i just want a large cup of coffee’
Woman: ‘I’d like one of those frozen chocolate chip drinks’
Me:
‘Did you want the one with coffee, or without coffee?’
Woman: ‘Oh you know, the frozen chocolate chip drink with the chips
on top!’
Me:
‘okay – we have two drinks – one is with coffee, on is
without coffee – both have chips inside’
Woman: ‘I want the one with the chocolate chips on top’
Me:
(now i’m getting freaked out) ‘Okay – did you want coffee or
not?’
Woman: ‘I want the chocolate chip drink! I don’t know why this is so
hard for you to understand!’
Me:
‘well, ma’am, it’s just that we have two different drinks w/
chips, and i’m trying to fi gure out which one you want.’
Man:
‘Just get the fi rst one with coffee in it’
Woman: ‘does it have chocolate chips on top?’
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 58
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 58
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
COFFEE
59
Me:
‘They both have chips on the inside, with whipped cream and
chocolate sauce drizzled on top, there are no chips on top’
Woman: ‘yes there are! i get it all the time here! it has chips on top’
Me:
‘i’m sorry, we do not do that drink here . . . it just has sauce
on top’
Man:
‘DO NOT CONTRADICT HER! SHE KNOWS WHAT SHE
GETS!’
Me:
‘okay fi ne.’
So I put her drink in line: a grande java chip frappucino with CHIPS
ON TOP. the two partners on drinks were like ‘WTF is this?’ i said ‘just
make it’.
I hope she liked her drink. 11
Because of the way that Starbucks overlays class anxieties (objectifi ed in
different capacities for ‘correct reference’ to a prestige commodity) on an
already fraught customer–server relationship, some customers treat the
attempt at repair to be in itself a face-threatening act of ‘correction’, or
will obstinately refuse to cooperate, or will continue to blunder forward in
confusion, leading the conversation to a place where the issue is no longer
a technical crisis, but a normative one. At such points the most explicit
statements of presuppositions about the hierarchical nature of the service
relationship will be found, attempts will be made by customers to achieve
by stipulation the respect it is felt are due all customers at the expense of the
respect which is generally not felt to be due the server. The recrudescence of
the aristocratic memory that haunts all service interactions is the focus here.
The basic claim that is being made is that servers in service interactions also
are due the courtesy that is normatively accorded customers in general. Here
the normative position of critique against which the reported conversation
is being compared is not the technical script, but the normative model of
ordinary conversation between peers. And here, to conclude, I would like to
suggest, service workers might basically agree with analysts of conversation,
that there is an obvious difference between ordinary conversations between
peers and service transactions. But this difference is normative. Each of
these transcripts of rants about customers is haunted by the normative, but
absent, image of ordinary talk between equals. It is the tacit comparison
to such an imagined normative model of talk that makes these SCOW
stories legible as rants. Since the customer is always right in the moment of
interaction, only on the internet can one relive and redress the inequality of
the encounter with the customer in a dialog with peers.
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 59
9781441160188_Ch02_Final_txt_print.indd 59
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:27:16 AM
CHAPTER THREE
Gin
Gin is a peculiar spirit: it cannot be understood or drunk by itself, it fi nd its
defi nition in relation to mixture. And there are two forms of mixture that
most characterize this drink, both of them expressions of different opposed
aspects of Western modernity. We have already seen above how the gin and
tonic indexes a complex set of associations of gin with the exotic elsewheres
of colonial modernity. On the other hand, gin, mixed with vermouth in the
form of the martini, instead indexes an equally lost world of the modernist
metropole. As Bernard de Voto put it:
The Martini is a city dweller, a metropolitan. It is not to be drunk beside
a mountain stream or anywhere else in the wilds, not in the open there
or even indoors. . . . A martini . . . does not harmonize with campfi res
and sleeping bags. (Cited in Rudin 1997)
Hence, gin, in different mixtures indexes both metropolitan and colonial
modernity, providing a cosmopolitan modern content that is infl ected
through the local particularity of different mixtures, but it also recursively
indexes the utopian and dystopian aspects of metropolitan modernity:
here the destructive aspect of gin comes to the foreground. Certainly early
modern London cannot be easily understood without the opposition between
the healthy and productive underclasses occupying the properly ordered
world of Beer Street and the debased lumpenproletariat of the disordered
destructive dystopia of Gin Lane, where gin, even at that time an industrial
drink, shows the negative effects of industrial modernity on the working
orders in general and women in particular (Dillon 2002: chapter 15).
The martini and the antinomies of modernity
Gin in general, and the martini in particular, seem to be implicated in the
antinomies of modernity in many ways. For a clear statement of the relation
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 60
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 60
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
GIN
61
of the martini to the idea of modernity, I can think of no better example of
this than the movie, The Thin Man (1934), in which the main characters,
the detective couple Nick and Nora Charles, drink their way through a
caper in style. When we fi rst meet Nick Charles, it is in a hotel bar, a scene
of couples dancing resolves to a scene of Nick tending bar, explaining to
the bar staff how to make a martini by demonstration. When we fi nd him,
he is shaking a martini, making a series of analogies between the rhythm
of popular dances and shaking the drink, fi nally pouring himself a martini,
placing it on the waiter’s platter, taking it back, and drinking it.
You see, the important thing is the rhythm. Always have rhythm in your
shaking. A Manhattan you shake to a fox trot. A Bronx to a two-step
time. A dry martini you always shake to waltz time. Now mind you,
there’s a still more modern trend.
The martini, of course, is associated with the gentlest dance (Edmunds
1981: 57). But this scene also shows how the making of the martini is a
connoisseur performance that focuses on the ritual of the mixture process,
what Edmunds calls ‘the martini rite’ (1981: 25–38). The connoisseurship of
the martini, whether in the fi gure of Nick Charles or James Bond, is always
displayed in knowledge of production (mixture), making it entirely unlike
the connoisseurship of wines or scotches, where the object of connoisseur
knowledge is the material that comes out of the bottle, not what you do
with it afterwards. For Nick Charles, each cocktail has its own rhythm, just
as each dance has its own rhythm. The motion of cocktails (non-humans)
is classifi ed in terms of the motion of people (humans).
His last drunken remark, left unfi nished, that there is a ‘still more modern
trend’ reminds us that in this time fashions and ‘trends’ in cocktails as in
dance steps are gathered together under the master concept of ‘the modern’.
The cocktail, and specifi cally the martini, which is the prototypical cocktail,
serves as an image of modernity, specifi cally, aesthetic modernism, as Rudin
argues:
Combining energy and austerity, power and subtlety, urbanity and
sophistication, all in a sexy, elegantly simple, streamlined package, the
martini is the essence of American modernism in drinkable form. It’s
modern America as cocktail. . . . Above all, the martini is a modern
cocktail. You could say it’s the modern cocktail. At the dawn of this
century, the recipe coalesced: London gin, French dry vermouth, and
a dash of orange bitters. It would get drier over time, but it found its
essential form at just about the same time as the skyscraper, the airplane,
jazz, and the two-piece business suit. Like them, the martini evoked
something essential about twentieth-century America. Linked early on
with the new century’s avant-garde, the martini for nearly seventy years
would express both ‘American’ and ‘modern.’ (1997: n.p.)
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 61
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 61
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
62
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Edmunds (2001) takes issue with Rudin here, arguing that it is not the
drink that expresses an iconic affi nity for modernism (since the drink was
invented long before), but the fi nal design of martini glass, which, whatever
its ultimate source, was certainly received as an image of modernist
aesthetics. The linkage of the martini with modernist aesthetics, Edmunds
argues, is particularly true of the postwar period, when ‘[t]he same corporate
executives who hired International Style architects drank Martinis. In
their minds, whether or not they ever articulated it, the buildings and the
drink might have expressed the same esthetic’ (2001). Edmunds further
develops Rudin’s point about the association of the martini with aesthetic
modernism, arguing that the ritual of mixing the martini changed its form
in line with changes in modernist aesthetics:
In the course of the 1950s, just as architecture moved in the direction
of brutalism, so the Martini became excessively dry, fl avorless vodka
replaced gin, and the ritual of mixing was abandoned in favor of the
Martini on the rocks. In both cases, the esthetic impulse of modernism
was carried to a self-defeating extreme. (2001: n.p.)
Modernity is defi ned fi rst and foremost in relationship to an ideology of
progress, and this is expressed iconically by changes in the form of the
martini in tandem with changes in modernist aesthetics.
Simple and complex messages of the martini
But this pervasive iconic relation with aesthetic modernism is not the only
message about modernity which the martini carries. Lowell Edmunds’
discussion of the semiotics of the drink begins in an essentially structuralist
fashion, showing the various ‘simple messages’ of the martini as a set of
binary oppositions like so (1981: 127–8):
The martini is . . .
is not . . .
American
European, Asian, African
urban
rural
upper class
lower class
male
female
optimistic
pessimistic
adult
immature
past
present
One could quibble about some of the associations, I would tend to agree
with Rudin (1997) that the modernist martini, as a quintessentially
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 62
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 62
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
GIN
63
progressive American drink, is essentially middle class, not upper- or lower
class. But be that as it may, the Martini, on one level, Edmunds shows, is
simple, particularly when compared with other drinks, but at the same
time, he shows how the martini’s more complex material mediations show
it to be a drink divided by irresolvable antinomies like modernity itself. For
one, the martini is civilized, expressive of communal relations (particularly
the martini rite), on the other hand, since it is very nearly pure gin, it is
associated with destructive excess (alcoholism, drunkenness); the ritual of
drinking it together celebrates communality and egalitarian relationships
(in the case of Nick and Nora Charles particularly), but it is also the drink
of the loner, like the macho individualist bordering on nihilist, James Bond
(Edmunds 1981: 7–59). The simple messages of the martini are those that
are selected when it is contrasted with other drinks (Edmunds 1981: 87),
while the martini by itself conveys more ambiguous messages when it is
considered in terms of the time and place of its drinking (Edmunds 1981:
88), when we move from a structuralist ‘code’ of drink oppositions to more
indexical and material mediations of the drink in its contexts.
The ambivalent material mediations of the martini affl ict Nick and
Nora’s relationship to martini. After all, Nora, having discovered that
Nick is six martinis ahead of her, insists that she catches up immediately,
a sociable gesture, but also an egalitarian one, expressing the ‘communal
martini of the relationship’ (Edmunds 1981: 19–44):
Nora:
How many drinks have you had?
Nick:
This will make six martinis.
Nora:
(to waiter) Will you bring me fi ve more martinis . . .
Nora:
. . . and line them right up here?
Waiter: Yes,
ma’am.
On the other hand, the fact that six martinis are, in fact, six glasses of cold
gin, expresses the ways that the ‘uncivilized’ material excess of the martini
(the indexical effects of gin on human physiology) cannot be contained
within its ‘civilized’ power to express egalitarian sociability (Edmunds
1981: 9–19). One can drink together, but a raging hangover is something
one must endure alone, as Nora discovers in the very next scene when she
wakes up the next morning:
Nora:
What hit me?
Nick:
The last martini.
The ‘simple messages’ of the martini discussed by Edmunds are those that
do not take the complex materiality of the martini into account, they are
the ‘structuralist’ martini, in which materiality is merely a sensuous peg
to hang social difference on, but the complex messages of the martini are
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 63
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 63
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
64
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
those that take the martini in all its ambivalent, contradictory material
complexity, in its indexical relations to the various contexts in which it
is drunk. Edmunds breaks with the structuralism of his list of ‘simple
messages’ to give a material basis for the ambiguous, contradictory messages
of the martini, and this break is what takes his structural analysis into a
more materialist semiotics. Here, Edmunds links the ambiguous messages
of the martini partially to the central division between what we could call
the social (communal, civilized, meaningful) martini and the material
(alcoholic, uncivilized, purely material) martini. The social communal
martini is one that is the product of the martini rite, ‘the drink that plays a
part in forming various groups of which society makes and remakes itself –
a club, a cocktail party . . .’ (Edmunds 1981: 8). By contrast,
as the alcoholic’s drink, the Martini has a function exactly the opposite
of the communal. It does not welcome the drinker into a brotherhood,
it isolates him. . . . Between the Martinis of brotherhood and of
alcoholism lies a whole progression of Martinis that drinkers use
against the world, but more or less harmlessly. (Edmunds 1981: 9)
Materiality and mixture: The basis for the ambiguities
Making a key break with the dematerialized semiotics of structuralism,
Edmunds locates the specifi c ambiguities of the martini’s messages in the
complex materiality of the drink and its ingredients. One key aspect of the
ambiguity of the martini as a cocktail is that it is defi ned by a complex
rejection and acceptance of the category of
mixture that defi nes the
cocktail. The categories prototypically associated with the ideal martini
are coldness, clarity, purity and most of all dryness (Edmunds 1981: 78–9).
The prototypical martini is the dry martini, a martini with very little in it
other than gin. The dry martini is an asymptote of a straight shot of liquor;
it must approach pure gin, but never reach it. For to reach a state of purity,
it would no longer be a cocktail (it wouldn’t be mixed), it would lapse
from being civilized to uncivilized. The category of ‘dryness’, of course,
denotes an asymptotic state between mixture and purity, mixture ever
approaching, but never reaching, purity. As such, dryness is also applied to
both the ingredients, dry gin and dry vermouth, neither of which are to be
drunk straight. Thus, they must be mixed. Because a martini verges on a
glass of cold gin, it is barbaric, but because it involves a complex mediation,
it is civilized.
But there is more to it than this. The sense that the martini is ‘civilized’,
the iconic relation with modernism, the association with urban metropolitan
life, all can be explained by a further investigation of qualisigns of purity and
dryness of the ingredients. Rehearsing a version of Levi-Strauss’s famous
‘raw and the cooked’ argument, Edmunds shows us how the production
process of all alcohols, being cumulative (each process applies to the result
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 64
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 64
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:23 AM
GIN
65
Raw
Cooked
Nature
Production process
Culture
Culinary Luddism
Culinary Modernism
Sensuous Qualisigns
Privative Qualisigns
Traditional Craft Technologies
Modern Industrial Technologies
Raw Material
Fermentation
Distillation
Rectification
Fruit
Wine
Brandy, Cognac
Grain
Beer (Mash)
Scotch, Bourbon
Vodka, Gin
Sugar, etc.
Rum, etc.
Figure 3.1 The raw and the cooked in alcoholic drinks
of the previous one), involves the progressive removal of what could be
called ‘natural’ sensuous qualisigns (conferred by the intrinsic character
of the ‘raw materials’ and which form the basis of connoisseurship with
respect to them) and their replacement with ‘cultural’ privative ones (the
purity, an absence of natural qualities, which is conferred by the production
process) ( Figure 3.1 ).
Each step of the production process of alcohol defi nes a new drink
category whose production includes all the previous steps. Thus, fermented
beverages (wines and beers) are ‘cooked’ compared to their raw materials,
but ‘raw’ compared to distilled beverages (which are all made from
fermented ones). Within distilled beverages, another distinction of the
same order arises, those made from fermented mash using a pot still (which
retain the gustatory properties of their raw material) and high ‘rectifi ed’
alcohols (which are made from purifi ed (multiply distilled) alcohol using
a column still and which have these gustatory properties, if at all, in an
attenuated degree). This produces the distinction between, say, brandies,
cognac, bourbon, whiskies versus ‘white spirits’, of which the most highly
rectifi ed are gin and vodka (Edmunds 1981: 62). Even within the white
liquors, there is a further distinction between those, like tequila or rum,
which ‘contain at least a hint of the raw material from which they were
born’ (Edmunds 1981: 62), and gin or vodka, which do not (at the time
Edmunds was writing, this was not a controversial assertion). The whole
production process, then, is one of purifi cation or privation in which the
process of production (culture) removes qualisigns distinctive of the ‘raw
material’ (nature). Thus, gin and vodka are different from all the others
in that it is almost completely irrelevant what they are made from (Hess
2001).
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 65
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 65
2/21/2001 11:29:24 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:24 AM
66
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Gin and vodka also stand as the most heavily
industrial drinks in
comparison to mixture of natural and artisanal features (
terroir ) that
gives other alcohols their distinctive properties. Gin and vodka, then,
are perfect icons of what Laudan calls ‘culinary modernism’, opposed to
the various kinds of alcohols that stand more closely linked to ‘culinary
luddism’ (Laudan 2001, also Meneley 2004). The production of gin is also
an icon of technological progress, and a recapitulation of that narrative
of progress: ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. From the perspective of a
typical narrative of technological progress which underlies most theories of
modernity (Pfaffenberger 1992), the production of gin and vodka stand at
the apex of a metaphoric staircase of technological innovation, including
all the steps therein: beginning with relatively ancient technologies like
fermentation, followed by medieval and early modern techniques of
distillation (typifi ed technologically by batch distillation using the pot
still, now regarded to be an artisanal or ‘craft’ technology), followed by
techniques of multiple distillation or rectifi cation (typifi ed by industrial
technologies like the column still that became standard in the 1870s). Thus,
when we are talking about gin here, the kind of gin used in a modernist
martini, we are not talking about Dutch Genever or nineteenth-century
Old Tom (sweet) gin (Rudin 1997), we are talking about late nineteenth–
twentieth century London Dry Gin, which requires precisely industrial
technological methods like continuous distillation in the column still,
which allowed it to be produced more cheaply and in larger quantities,
and which largely replaced other varieties by the 1920s. 1 Not merely an
icon of technological progress, London Dry Gin had all the ‘progressive’
virtues that characterized other ‘culinary modernist’ foods and drinks:
‘egalitarian, available more or less equally to all, without demanding the
disproportionate amount of the resources of time or money that traditional
foodstuffs did’ (Laudan 2001: 42).
This then, is another way that these drinks are icons of the ‘modernist’
compared to these other ‘traditional’ drinks. Since most discourses of
connoisseurship are predicated on such ‘natural’ qualisigns, vodka and gin
have in common that their distinctive properties are actually a privation of
natural qualities (Hess 2001):
The distance between gin and vodka, at least in advertisable qualities, is
considerable, but the difference between gin and whisky, beer and wine
is vast. All of these have some intrinsic character. Wine, pressed from
grapes, is close to nature, close to the earth. . . . Whiskies are hand-
made, and then mellowed for years in wooden barrels. As for gin, no one
quite knows what grain it has been distilled from. Aging is unnecessary.
. . . Since gin is the spirit without qualities, it can only be advertised as
the essential ingredient in a mixed drink. Gin’s only quality is privative:
it lacks something, something with which it can be combined. (Edmunds
1981: 64)
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 66
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 66
2/21/2001 11:29:24 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:24 AM
GIN
67
It is understandable, then, that modernist connoisseurship in gin would be
found not in the subtle appreciation of its natural properties like terroir
in an unmixed form, since it lacks such properties, but in the ‘martini
rite’, the process of mixing the drink is where all modernist discourses
of gin connoisseurship centre. And as Edmunds notes, as time went on,
the martini rite became increasingly obsessed with achieving a state
of maximal dryness, to the extent that gadgets of various kinds were
introduced to produce the optimal state of mixture, one characterized by
achieving an asymptotic mixture of vermouth in gin where the amount of
vermouth approaches, but never reaches, the vanishing point (Edmunds
1981: 31–8).
So the modernist connoisseurship of gin and vodka, if there was any,
depends on understanding not how they are icons and indexes of nature but
how they are not . This brings us to dryness and purity as qualisigns. Dryness
and purity are not only qualisigns of the drink resulting from mixture, but
they are qualities that also apply to both the unmixed ingredients, gin and
vermouth. Dryness is also what distinguishes gin from vodka. Gin, after all,
has an additional component in the production process (fl avouring neutral
spirit with botanicals); compared to vodka (though some vodkas are in fact
fl avoured), gin would appear to take ‘a step backwards’, moving from the
fl avourless modernist perfection of vodka back towards the natural fl avour
of juniper or other botanicals:
[G]in has to take a step backward, as it were, in the direction of the more
fl avorful white spirits, the brandies, and the whiskies. If gin did not take
this step, it would remain completely neutral in taste, utterly abstract.
. . . Gin is by defi nition vodka to which botanicals have been added.
(Edmunds 1981: 63)
However, this ‘step backwards’ in the direction of nature (the botanicals)
that separates gin from vodka remains fi rmly subordinated to the quality
of ‘dryness’:
All [manufacturers], however, aim at something called ‘dryness’. When
manufacturers boast of the dryness of their product, they are not saying
it is not sweet . . . but that it is fl avorless as possible while still retaining
the characteristic taste of gin. . . . In pursuing this goal of dryness,
gin manufacturers inevitably lost the race to vodka, which is what gin
would be if it had no fl avor. . . . Paradoxically, it was the taste for dry
gin that made the triumph of vodka inevitable. Vodka is the furthest
removed from the grain (formerly potatoes) of its origin, and gin is next
in neutrality. They are the most abstract, and therefore, most in need of
defi nition. . . . Again vodka can, by tradition, be drunk chilled and neat,
as with caviar, but gin cannot. Only in virtue of its mixed state does gin
attain an identity. (Edmunds 1981: 63)
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 67
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 67
2/21/2001 11:29:24 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:24 AM
68
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
‘Dryness’, as a qualisign applicable both to the martini and to its main
ingredients, is not an absence of qualitative properties, but a stripping down
of properties; it is the difference between minimalism (gin) and absence
(vodka). So, the connoisseurship of the classic martini rite features very
little talk about the distinctive qualities of the ingredients, but a lot of talk
about how to mix them. With one exception: all late modernist martini
texts (written in the 1970s) have one interesting emergent dimension of
connoisseurship, the water. Specifi cally, its purity. Obviously purity is
something that rectifi ed alcohols and contemporary bottled waters both
aim for, but this was a period in which bottled waters, like Perrier, were
coming onto the market in America, and precisely the time when fears
about the quality and taste of tap water were becoming normalized.
Hence, whenever there is talk of water to be mixed directly with gin or to
make the ice, this water increasingly has to be some form of bottled spring
or mineral water: ‘the reality that underlies the Martini-mixer’s choice
of distilled water, bottled spring water, or Perrier or the like for his ice,
is that what comes out of the tap in most American cities is undrinkable’
(Edmunds 1981: 47). Kingsley Amis, who is a bit of a maverick in that he
insists that the best way to really appreciate gin (or at least, to improve
on the gin and tonic) is to drink it straight mixed with water, advocated
Malvern water for this purpose (2008: 105). This latter fear will be the
topic of the next chapter, but what is interesting here is that the properties
of propertylessness (purity and dryness) that defi ne the martini itself and
all its original ingredients (gin, vermouth) also allow the recruitment of
new ingredients (vodka, after all, is what gin would be if it was not dry,
but pure), and also applies to old ingredients, as the purity of the water
comes to be increasingly at issue at a time, after all, when a martini is
increasingly served ‘on the rocks’.
The contexts for martinis: Cocktail party
and dinner party
In its heyday, the martini could be consumed embedded in two very
different kinds of occasions, one more ‘sociable’ or ‘informal’, the other
more ‘ritual’ or ‘formal’, the cocktail party and the dinner party. And in
the movie, the Thin Man , we fi nd the martini playing a central role in the
two major parts of the movie in which Nick and Nora Charles do their
sleuthing. In the fi rst major scene, a cocktail party in Nick and Nora’s hotel
room, Nick and Nora begin their investigation of the crime. In the fi nal
scene, a dinner party, Nick and Nora reveal the fruits of their investigation.
The movie is divided between these two central and paradigmatic genres
of sociability, at both of which, among other things, it is appropriate to
consume a martini.
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 68
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 68
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
GIN
69
Perhaps we could begin the contrast between the two genres in the Thin
Man by noting how people are invited. In the cocktail party, they simply
drop in (Nora calls the hotel front desk and says ‘Don’t bother to announce
anyone. Just send them all up!’), at the dinner party, the guests are all
suspects, so their invitation card is an arrest warrant. Cocktails are present
at both, of course, but at the cocktail party they are the only thing present
and people drink as they choose. At the cocktail party, the question of food
is mooted as an afterthought (Nora: ‘I’ve got to order some food.’ Nick:
‘Isn’t it a waste of energy?’ Eventually Nora calls room service: ‘Send me
up a fl ock of sandwiches!’). At the dinner party at the end, the cocktails
precede the meal, the cocktail party is an informal beginning to the
formal dinner party, and here the guests are ordered to drink (Policeman
dressed as waiter: Have a cocktail. Male Guest: No, I don’t care for any.
Policeman: I said, have a cocktail! Female guest: I guess he wants us to have
a cocktail.).
According to Rudin, cocktail parties and the drinks served at them, like
the martini, began as egalitarian, decidedly middle-class urban phenomena.
In sharp contrast to dinner parties, they represented an egalitarian genre
of entertainment that was relatively low cost and could be adjusted to
whatever settings one had available.
Things changed quickly after World War I, hand in hand with another
new American institution. ‘The “party”’, wrote Malcolm Cowley in
1931, ‘conceived as a gathering together of men and women to drink gin
cocktails, fl irt, dance to the phonograph or radio and gossip about their
absent friends, had in fact become one of the most popular American
institutions; nobody stopped to think how short its history had been.
. . . It was introduced into this country by Greenwich Villagers – before
being adopted by salesmen from Kokomo and the younger country-
club set in Kansas City.’ The new cocktail-party culture differed from
Victorian styles of entertaining. Reduced immigration and rising wages
meant middle-class households could no longer afford domestic servants,
and kitchens and dining rooms in modern homes (and apartments) were
too small for elaborate formal luncheons and dinners. Martini-and-
Manhattan parties were a natural solution. (Rudin 1997)
The cocktail forms the focus of the cocktail party, food the periphery, at
the dinner party, it is the opposite. At the cocktail party, there is no central
focus of attention, small elective conversational groupings, sitting or
standing, prevail; at the dinner party, there is assigned seating and a central
focus of attention, one single conversation. At the cocktail party, the hosts
are also the waiters, a certain egalitarianism prevailing between the guests
and the hosts; at the dinner party, role distinctions are reinforced not only
the hosts assigning the guests seating (and dragging them there using the
police, surely a metaphoric development of the more general unfreedom
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 69
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 69
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
70
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
that is instantiated by the everyday dinner party), but also by the presence
of servants. Further, cocktail parties accentuate the participant as an
unattached individual whose gender and marital status is irrelevant, Nick
and Nora wander freely and are not ‘joined at the hip’; the dinner party
takes the couple as the basic unit that is ritually emphasized (in this case
by seating couples next to one another). The cocktail party emerges as an
egalitarian, informal, democratic, individualist form of sociability, while
the dinner party tends to have all the opposite features.
It is surprising that given how much food for thought there is the
cocktail party, as we have just seen, that the cocktail party, with one
minor exception to be discussed, is never studied much in its own right.
In American sociological literature, the cocktail party serves instead as
a constant familiar example of modern sociability playing a role similar
to the salon or coffee house in European literature on sociability (Mische
and White 1998: 6). A characteristic role the cocktail party plays in this
literature is to serve as an emblem of the modern condition, generally
opposed to a certain class of traditional phenomena gathered together
under the general heading ‘ritual’. Valerio Valeri, for example, begins his
exemplary discussion of feasting and festivity using the cocktail party and
the reception precisely to illustrate the modern’s loss of traditional forms
of ritual festivity:
Our festivities are reduced to a shadow of what they once were. Cocktail
parties and receptions are enclosed like contagious diseases within
the rigid limits of a time and a space measured with avarice. Oozing
the ennui of carefully controlled excitement, followed by the anxious
calculation of one’s success or faux pas, our modern festivities transmit
an impoverished image of what festivities once were. (2001: 1)
The cocktail party stands in for modernity in opposition to traditional
forms of commensality, however, even among the moderns, there are haves
and have nots. In their classic study of the role of the host at American
cocktail parties, Riesman et al. (1960) specifi cally opposed the urban
cocktail party of the northern American cities to the southern variant, the
‘open house’, in which invitees are graded according to rank and other
personal status features, and the whole affair remains trapped in a world
‘more ceremonially rigid and impersonally regulated’, as Simmel would
have it (Simmel 1949: 257), in short, more ritualistic than sociable, than
that of the North:
The large, urban cocktail party serves as one familiar example of the
type of sociability which we have been describing. Perhaps less familiar
is the southern variant, which would be called a tea, or open house. . . .
The occasions were traditional rather than spontaneous, ritualistic
rather than intimate . . . . The role of the host – or, more accurately, the
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 70
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 70
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
GIN
71
hostess, at a large ritualistic occasion of this sort is as much governed
by tradition as that of the guests. (Riesman et al. 1960: 20, emphasis
added)
So the modern sociability of the cocktail party is not only opposed to the
formality of the dinner party, but also to a whole series of ‘traditional’
ritual forms. But alongside this narrative in which the cocktail party is
the harbinger of loss of tradition, the cocktail party and cocktail party
conversation, associated with free mixture and egalitarian exchange of
drunken opinion without respect to status, is also adduced as an example
par excellence of Simmel’s sociable interaction, that is, interaction pursued
for no end other than itself, associated with freedom, egalitarianism,
conversation and fl irtation in their ‘play form’ unconstrained by external
ends, opposed at every step to means–ends related ‘business-like’ behaviour
(Simmel 1949: 259). For Habermas, too, the opposition between ritual and
sociable orders of interaction corresponds closely to the opposition between
pre-modern aristocratic ‘representative’ and modern ‘bourgeois’ publicity
that frames his analysis of the emergence of the public sphere. The main
difference between Simmel’s sociability and Habermas’ sociability is that
Simmel’s is a play form of association, including both conversation and
coquetry, reason and fl irtation, and therefore goes well with a martini
and even better with several martinis. Habermas’ sociable conversation is
designed, by contrast, to unleash the power of reason, these are serious
sober dialogs between equals, and are best served with espresso.
Signal and noise: The cocktail party as
channel and its parasites
If the cocktail party is emblematic of the tenor of modern sociability,
what are the specifi c characteristics of this sociability? Here sociologists
turned the example of the cocktail party into primarily a meditation on
channels of communication. First of all, the cocktail party is an image of a
diffuse, decentred, sociable gathering where many different conversations
are happening simultaneously. Secondly, the cocktail party is an image
of an event where those conversations require certain infrastructures,
specifi cally the phatic labour, but also the material labour, of the host to
occur. Thirdly, these same gatherings consist of a plurality of channels of
communication (conversational groupings) side by side; as a result, they
are productive of vast amounts of noise, in which the normal operation of
each separate channel interferes with the operation of the other channels
of communication that are part of the same party. It is interesting that
we see the cocktail party move from being associated with a channel of
communication (a relation: conversation) to a series of entities that either
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 71
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 71
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
72
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
create or interfere with this relation (the host and the noise, respectively).
Interestingly, these two latter entities fall under the rubric of the French
defi nition of
parasite , a linguistic happenstance which gives Michael
Serres the point of departure for his remarkable meditation on entities
‘which take up residence in systems without becoming part of them’ (in
Paul Kockelman’s (2010) elegant phrase):
The Parasite (1982). Briefl y,
the relevance of his argument that is relevant here is this: If a channel of
communication (a conversation) is a relation, then what both the host and
the noise of other conversations have in common is that they have relations
to a relation (Serres 1982: 33), thus are ‘parasitic’ in an extremely broad
sense. The cocktail party thus moves from representing a kind of relation
(conversations, channels of communication) to a series of parasites of that
relation (hosts, noise). Just as gin and the martini represent modernity in all
its ambivalence, then, so too the cocktail party represents both signal and
noise as endemic to this emblematically modern genre of sociability.
First, the cocktail party as a conversational gathering, or rather, a
gathering of conversations. One might guess that Erving Goffman has a lot
to say about cocktail parties, but he does not. In his Presentation of Self in
Everyday Life (1959), for example, they appear just to stand for a certain
kind of performance without a central focus, in contrast to, say, a political
speech: ‘Many performance involve, as constituent parts, separate knots or
clusters of verbal interaction. Thus a cocktail part typically involves several
conversational subgroups which constantly shift in size and membership’
(Goffman 1959: 106–7). This becomes the standard way the cocktail party
example is mobilized in interactional literature. For example, Irvine (1979:
779) uses the ‘lecture’ opposed to the ‘American cocktail party’ to illustrate
the formal and informal poles of one dimension of formality, which is the
‘emergence of a central situational focus’, characteristic of the former and
not the latter, which consists of many small decentralized conversational
groups. The cocktail party is a purely ‘sociolinguistic’ event that consists of
a series of conversational groupings.
But to treat a cocktail party this way, as an aggregate of conversations
that simply happen ‘bottom up’, ignores not only the fact that there have to
be cocktails, both also the other conditions of possibility of such talk. As
Gaudio argues more generally for Conversational Analysis, such a view of
conversation abstracts conversations from the spatio-temporal and material
conditions for those conversations (2003: 686). The sociological cocktail
party of pure conversations requires a material infrastructure: all the things
provided by the host, the place, the time, the people invited, and a good
supply of drinks, and sometimes, food, as well as music, games, and so forth
(Riesman et al. 1960: 19). But convivial conversations do not just happen;
to produce convivial conversational groupings requires infrastructure of
another kind, an infrastructure of communicative channels over which
these conversations can happen, ‘nodes of connectivity’ around which
conversational groupings can congeal, the kind produced by what Elyachar
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 72
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 72
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
GIN
73
(2010) calls ‘phatic labor’. The phatic function of language is the function
that foregrounds the channel of communication (Elyachar 2010: 458, see
also Kockelman 2010). Elyachar argues that ‘“phatic labor” creates a social
infrastructure of communicative channels that are as essential . . . as roads,
bridges, or telephone lines’ (2010: 452).
In the micro-economy of the cocktail party, much of this phatic labour
is done by the host, labour that was foregrounded in one of the few actual
sociological studies of the cocktail party in the period of its heyday,
Riesman et al.’s the Vanishing Host (1960). Recognizing that ‘hosting’
may be distributed like the conversational groupings themselves across
both hosts and guests (Riesman et al. 1960: 19), in their analysis of the
cocktail party, ‘host’ becomes a generalized designation for what we could
call ‘phatic laborer’.
The almost infrastructural relation of host to sociability is partially
what causes the host to ‘vanish’ from sociable interaction. Cocktail parties
require a certain amount of ‘management and social engineering’ (channels
for conversational groupings must be created, maintained, managed), and
the host can take more or less of a managerial role, becoming more or
less inconspicuous, effortful or laissez-faire, with varying results. Some of
this work in building channels is purely ‘sociable’, the host circulates as a
medial fi gure, acting as a ‘broker’, a ‘bridge’ or a ‘matchmaker’ between
the guests (Riesman et al. 1960: 26, what Elyachar (2010: 458) calls a
‘phatic pimp’). Not only introductions must be made, but connections,
in a way that produces resources for sociable conversation: ‘One of
the fi rst tasks of the host, often, is simply to convince his guests that
their own observations and experiences are, in fact, sociable resources’
(Riesman et al. 1960: 24). Like any infrastructure, conversational
channels must not only be created but also require constant maintenance,
they must be, in particular, insulated from the noise coming from other,
nearby channels. One host
managed to give everyone at a dinner party of eleven a sense of being
responded to, despite the fact that three of his male guests (not refugees,
but old-stock Americans) were not only highly voluble but talked as
loudly to a small group as if holding forth to a multitude. He did this
either by changing the subject so as to quiet one guest and evoke another,
or by moving quietly about himself, forming small enclaves immune to
the noisier discussion elsewhere: his own presence had such weight as
to serve as an equalizer: meanwhile, his wife managed the ‘work’ of the
party, bringing drinks and occasionally her attentive ear, leaving her
husband free for the more ‘social’ enterprises. (Riesman et al. 1960: 25,
emphasis added)
Mary Douglas, in her assessment of this literature, notes that ‘practically
nothing is said about the drinks’ (1987: 6), but this is not strictly true.
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 73
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 73
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
74
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Riesman et al. make clear that there is a certain tension between the material
and the social aspects of phatic labour in creating infrastructural channels:
the social work of providing resources for sociability is complemented by the
material work of ‘simply fueling the guests’ metabolisms’ (1960: 27). Thus,
in the absence of servants, the phatic labour of hosting is divided between
what they call ‘subsistence’ and ‘sociable’ hosting, sometimes distributed
according to gender across a husband–wife team, sometimes delegated to
a friend, sometimes managed by the host(s) dividing their (certainly the
Thin Man cocktail party scene provides ample examples of Nick and Nora
taking turns mixing people and mixing drinks):
As for the host, the ‘subsistence’ duties, which in an earlier day would have
been undertaken by servants, usually do not end when the preparations
are complete, but extend into the party, keeping him preoccupied and, in
effect, turning him into a butler at his own party. In general, the middle
classes have not – all household appliances to the contrary – caught up
with the consequences of the virtual disappearance of trained servants.
. . . Sometimes a husband and wife are able skillfully to divide among
themselves the work of ‘subsistence’ hosting and the gaiety of ‘sociable’
hosting. (Riesman et al. 1960: 27)
The cocktail party, then, requires infrastructures, channels, with both
‘social’ and ‘material’ dimensions, managed by the phatic labour of
the host, to produce the purely conversational cocktail party of diffuse
decentred sociability. But the materiality of talk produces a second problem
for the host, as we have already seen: lots of small conversational groupings
of increasingly drunk people in a small space produces the ‘noisy party’
(1960: 21). The multiple channels of the cocktail party as signal generates
its opposite: the cocktail party as noise. Properties of channels are again
divided in twain: the problem of sociability becomes a problem of acoustics.
As Kockelman (2010: 412) puts it ‘just as dirt is matter out of place, we may
say that noise is information out of place.’
In fact, there is a whole literature on acoustic processing revolving
around a phenomenon that takes its name from its prototypical exemplar,
the ‘cocktail party effect’, which Cherry initially defi ned as a general
problem of speech recognition ‘how do we recognize what one person
is saying when others are speaking at the same time (the “cocktail party
problem”)?’ (1953: 975–6). Probably no other genre of communication
has been subjected to as much acoustic analysis as this one, foregrounding
the general problems not only of creating and managing several channels
of communication between (drunk) people, but also protecting these
channels from the adjacent noise produced by other channels. In 1958,
for example, we fi nd a short piece titled ‘on the Acoustics of Cocktail
Parties’ which shows that the distinction between quiet and noisy parties
depends
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 74
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 74
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:25 AM
GIN
75
upon a critical acoustic relationship rather than upon the guests
themselves. An explicit formula is found for the maximum number N of
well-mannered guests compatible with the quiet party. When this number
is exceeded, the party will become a loud one within a calculable time
T. (MacLean 1958: 79)
While I will leave the specifi cs of this acoustic formula to the readers to dig
up and decipher themselves, the point is that the cocktail party, considered
acoustically as a series of channels of communication, produces a material
excess (noise) that threatens these channels themselves. Certainly there are
normative elements in this (possibly tongue in cheek) paper, the guests must,
for example, be ‘well mannered’ (and no mention is made of the independent
variable of increasing drunkenness!), but the general conclusion shows that
cocktail parties, as events with multiple channels of communication, have
certain immanent tendencies that undermine them. The conclusion:
We see therefore that, once the critical number of guests is exceeded,
the party suddenly becomes a loud one. The power of each talker rises
exponentially to a practical maximum Pm after which each reduces his
or her talking distance below the conventional distance d and then
0
maintains, servo fashion, just the proximity, tete a tete , required to
attain a workable signal-to-noise ratio. Thanks to this phenomenon the
party, although a loud one, can still be confi ned within one apartment.
(MacLean 1958: 80)
So a cocktail party, presented initially as a familiar example of a purely
sociological or sociolinguistic phenomenon of a situation which is
composed of multiple conversations slowly takes on material form, as it
does so, becomes subject to risk and contingency of materiality: multiple
conversations become multiple channels, and multiple channels produce
noise in what we assume to be a small downtown apartment. The 1950s–
1960s literature which canonized the cocktail party as an exemplifi cation
of pure sociable conversation (a purely sociological phenomenon) also drew
attention to what I am calling, following Elyachar (2010), the ‘phatic labor’
of creating the material and semiotic infrastructural order of the party,
the channels along which these conversations occur: mixing people and
mixing drinks. At the same time, the cocktail party moved from being
a sociological image of sociable signal to a material–acoustic image of
noise, since these channels produce a material excess which is encountered
as noise. The image of modernity presented by the cocktail party in
modernist sociological literature presents some of the same ambiguities as
the martini.
Edmunds classic discussion of the Martini (1981) stands at a historical
watershed moment when the modernist form of the martini was assuming
what he later calls the ‘brutalist’ form of the martini on the rocks and
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 75
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 75
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
76
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
the movement from the dryness of the gin martini to the purity of the
vodka martini. In the 1990–2000s, we see two movements which break
apart broadly modernist consensus about gin and the martini, producing
on the one hand a colourful, sweet, cheerfully postmodernist martini, the
fauxtini, which lacks any of the characteristic features of the modernist
dry martini, and on the other hand, a culinary luddite reaction against the
culinary modernism of industrial dry gin, which fi nds its expression in an
explosion of gin (and vodka) connoisseurship which seek to link gin and
vodka production and connoisseurship with natural terroir and artisanal
manufacture. Both have in common that they foreground certain latent
qualisigns of the modernist martini and background others: in the former
case, the fl avourless purity of the vodka martini allowed limitless fl avourful
vodka-based mixtures to be poured into a classic martini glass; in the latter
case, the botanicals and other sensuous qualisigns normally backgrounded
under the dominant sign of dryness come to the fore.
Chemical castration: The Bond martini
becomes the fauxtini
The vodka martini, once the hypercorrect ‘macho’ form of the martini
preferred by James Bond, proved to be the material foundation in the 1990s
for a whole series of drinks, generally called fauxtinis, that mobilized the
affordance of the fl avourlessness of vodka (treated by some mixologists as
the ‘chicken breast of cocktails’ (Matus 2011)) to pour a whole series of
what are conventionally called ‘girl drinks’ into a martini glass. Vodka,
after all, unlike gin, mixes with pretty much anything, so the material base
of a dry vodka martini proved quite open to new forms of mixture. Starting
with ‘classics’ like the Apple Martini and the Cosmopolitan, the category,
redubbed ‘fauxtini’, soon moved in the 1990s to include colourful sweet
drinks like the Blue Martini, the Chocolate Martini, and so on.
For most martini purists, these newfangled martinis are not martinis,
but they unquestionably fall into the received category of ‘girl drink’,
memorably typifi ed in a famous Kids in the Hall sketch (‘Girl Drink
Drunk’) as a drink like a ‘Chocolate Choo Choo . . . It’s a girl drink.
Tastes like candy.’
2 The semiotics of the classic girl drink are complex
mixtures of conventionally feminine qualities (like girls, they are made
of ‘sugar and spice and everything nice’), virtually all of which are the
antithesis of the stripped down modernism of the classic dry martini:
sweetness, ornamentation (let’s start with umbrellas), bright colours, and
so on. The basic motif of the girl drink is the masking of the ‘masculine’
properties of the drink (the high alcoholic content) under a varied lattice
of ‘feminine’ properties. There are classic forms that stand far apart from
the martini, many of them with names that more or less explicitly gender
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 76
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 76
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
GIN
77
or sexualize them: the Pink Lady, Sex on the Beach, and so on. As noted in
the introduction, because they are drinks that have conventionally iconic
feminine properties, to drink them is to (indexically) conventionally classify
oneself as ‘feminine’.
The ‘fauxtini’, deriving from the macho Bond Martini, is unambiguously
a girl drink, but its status as a martini is ambiguous. Critics of the fad can
be quite categorical:
No sober man would ever assert that a martini is a ‘girl drink.’ The
martini, a.k.a. the King of Cocktails, is a universe away from girl drink
status. The Woo Woo is a girl drink. The tequila sunrise is a girl drink.
The Cosmopolitan is the quintessential girl drink. But _____ is certainly
correct that the word ‘martini’ has been coopted by dark forces. A
chocolate martini is a contradiction in terms. Ditto for the apple martini.
We can say, emphatically and in no uncertain terms, that a drink that is
anything other than a ratio of gin/vodka and vermouth, with either an
olive or a lemon twist, is not a martini . If we want to be charitable, we
can call these pretenders ‘cocktails.’ In most cases, however, we should
call them what they are: abominations. 3
Edmunds, returning to this material after a hiatus of decades, offers some
interesting observations as to how this transition was mediated (I have
already pointed to one, which is the infi nite malleability of the dry (without
vermouth) vodka martini). First of all, Edmunds explains, the transition is
mediated by metonymy: Martini (the prototypical cocktail) becomes the name
for cocktails in general (so ‘Blue Skyy Martini’ means ‘Blue Skyy cocktail’).
This is reinforced by visual metonymy, where the ‘Martini glass had long
since come to stand for “cocktail” in the ubiquitous tilting neon sign.’ 4 This
visual metonymic relation points to the basic medium of the translation,
which is that the drink came to be defi ned by the characteristic glass and not
the contents, the iconic glass is the vehicle by which the ‘symbolic capital’ of
the classic martini is transferred to a whole series of ‘anything martinis’.
One step forward and two steps back:
The revenge of culinary luddism
Writing at the end of the 1970s, Edmunds cannot imagine gin being prized
for itself, but only as part of a martini rite that has become obsessed with
the privation of properties, dryness and purity. In fact, it would have seemed
absurd, even laughable, to attempt to make straight gin the object of the
same kind of connoisseur discourse as, say, wine or whisky. However, at
the same time, if one wanted to make this absurd attempt, it was clear what
properties of the gin one would seize upon: the botanicals. The botanicals,
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 77
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 77
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
78
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
after all, are the main individuating feature of gin, the only thing it has in
the way of properties that connect it to the kind of sensuous distinction that
leads to social distinction. Thus, Kingley Amis, in his advice on the art of
boozemanship, ‘the art of coming out ahead when any question of drinking
expertise or experience arises’, written at some point between 1971 and
1984 (2008: 156), advises his audience to avoid attempting displays of
connoisseurship in well-trodden areas like wine and beer, but gives samples
of how one might do it with gin, and thence move to scotch:
First, a simple ploy with gin, equally effective in private house and pub.
Asked what you’d like to drink, say simply, ‘Gin, please.’ Wave away
tonic, lemon, even ice, and accept only a little water – bottled, naturally.
Someone’s sure to ask you if that’s all you really want, etc. Answer: ‘Yes
I must say I like to be able to taste the botanicals, which just means I like
the taste of gin, I suppose. Of course, a lot of people only like the effect.’
Any gin-and-tonic drinkers in earshot will long to hit you with a meat
axe, which after all is the whole object.
Later, switch to Scotch, saying in tones of casual explanation, ‘I get sick
of these fully rectifi ed spirits after a bit, don’t you?’ That should draw a
fairly blank stare. Then, ‘I mean I like a bit of the old pot still. Well, I
just enjoy the touch of malt.’ If that doesn’t clear things up much, say,
‘I’m sorry, I didn’t realize’, making it clear that you’re adding under your
breath, ‘that I was talking to a bunch of peasants’. (Amis 2008: 157)
At the time Amis was writing in the 1970s to early 1980s, there was nothing
controversial about claiming a connoisseurship for scotch, but at this point,
clearly, doing it for gin would have been maverick, very much unlike scotch.
But just as it was already clear that the basis of gin connoisseurship would
be found in the botanicals, and that to make this claim, one would have to
make the unusual move of drinking the gin straight or mixed with water.
Having begun with gin (a highly rectifi ed drink) allows an unusual gambit
of ‘boozemanship’ to scotch, namely, dwelling on (usually unfamiliar)
technical details on the process of production that differentiate these two
drinks, foregrounding rectifi cation in the case of gin, and ‘the old pot still’
in the case of the more straightforwardly hegemonic connoisseurship of
scotch. Scotch, after all, like most traditional prestige distilled alcohols,
is defi ned by a constellation of features, but probably the technology of
distillation is the least familiar of these, and therefore the most effective
in the art of boozemanship. The combination of features that defi ne a
good scotch are comparable to those of a good rum, as enumerated by
no less an authority than Trader Vic himself: ‘(1) Soil, climate and water;
(2) the use of the old pot still; (3) the ingredient of the wash and its slow
fermentation; (4) aging solely by time and in white oak’ (1946: 41). This
list, applicable to a good many prestige distilled drinks, which contains
both elements of nature and artisanal technology, resembles the mixture
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 78
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 78
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
GIN
79
of human and non-human elements that defi ne a terroir . I underscore this
because virtually none of these factors have any application or relevance to
the production or connoiseurship of gin or vodka in the modernist period,
but as we will see, in the last decade or so, virtually all of them come to
do so. It appears that in order to become a premium spirit, these are the
generic features one must lay claim to.
How did drinks that were once the paragons of what Laudan calls
‘culinary modernism’ come to be ‘reversed engineered’ (borrowing felicitous
phrase from Heather Paxson (2010) to describe a similar situation) to fi t the
artisanal, natural discourse of ‘culinary luddism’? First of all, this ‘reverse
engineering’ begins within the semiotic discourse of branding, and accepts
the basic premise of that discourse that there is a fundamental opposition
between the product and the brand. Hence, the marketing of the premium
spirits is typically represented as having two separate aspects, a referential
discourse of ‘educational messaging’, a strongly realist connoisseur
discourse having to do educating consumers to discern the distinctive
qualities of the product (cf. Weiss 2011), and a non-referential discourse
of ‘aspirational messaging’ that instead is addressed to the imagination,
developing consumer lifestyle associations with the brand (Fresh Minds
2006).
Aspirational marketing and empire:
‘Heritage cues’ and exotic botanicals
When premium vodkas and gins fi rst appeared in the late 1970s, the semiotic
ideology of ‘aspirational messaging’ was perhaps most in evidence. Vodkas,
defi ned by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau as ‘neutral spirits
. . . without distinctive character, aroma, taste, or color’ would appear to be
the perfect product to showcase the power of aspirational messaging, given
that by defi nition there are no marketable distinctive product qualities
(Matus 2011). Think of the Absolut Vodka or Grey Goose marketing
campaigns, focusing on rather abstract lifestyle messages centring around
the iconic bottle, with little or no reference to the properties of the product,
to get a sense of what kind of marketing campaign this would be (Matus
2011).
But while vodkas are perhaps forced to take a more ‘aspirational line’
because of the basic perceived lack of distinctive properties (though,
naturally, this has been disputed in recent years), there is no question that
gin marketers have a lot more distinctive properties to play with (Fresh
Minds 2006). Initially, super premium gins adopt a ‘hybrid’ strategy’ in
the 1980s whose best exemplar is probably Bombay Sapphire (1987). The
modernist design of the blue bottle, of course, hearkens to a modernist
aesthetic not dissimilar to the almost completely ‘aspirational’ marketing
of Absolut Vodka. But attached to this bottle are a whole series of what
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 79
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 79
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
80
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
the company calls ‘heritage cues’ that loosely associate the brand with
the world of the British empire, referencing an original recipe dating from
1761, along with the image of Queen Victoria and the Bombay Sapphire
itself on the label. All these create a kind of ‘myth of authenticity’ (Clegg
2005) which suggests a non-existent connection of the spirit to the days
of empire, a connection which the company nowhere asserts to be true,
but which consumers, in my experience, typically believe to be true (a
common problem with puffery, as Parmentier (1994) notes). ‘Heritage
cues’, one might say, are the ‘aspirational’ (non-referential, suggestive)
doppelganger of source-identifying indexicals: they depend legally on the
fact that they do not constitute (falsifi able) assertions about origins, but
that they are largely taken by consumers to amount to such. Overall, the
hybrid aesthetics located between modernism (bottle design) and tradition
(‘heritage cues’) is presented by the company as simply a higher level
form of aspirational marketing, one which even improves on the elitist
didacticism of ‘educational’ marketing by liberating the imaginations of
consumers from the dead weight of facts. As the company spokesperson
puts it: ‘There’s a healthy tension between the heritage cues on the bottle
and its sleek, contemporary appearance. People fi nd it intriguing. . . . Part
of it is about discovery, allowing the consumer to do the interpretation
rather than telling them what to think’ (Clegg 2005).
But Bombay Sapphire, like most gins, rests its main claims to premium
status on an actual discernible property of the product, the botanicals.
While gin has always had botanicals, in the ‘modernist’ gin, botanicals
were largely concealed under the dominant qualisign of ‘dryness’, but with
the creation of new ‘artisanal’ gins, this ‘step backwards’ towards nature
in the production process really comes into its own. To this end, Bombay
Sapphire inscribes the ten botanicals that give this spirit its distinctive
properties
directly on the bottle.
5 But even here the two discourses,
aspirational and educational, are hybridized. Certainly the description
of the Bombay Sapphire botanicals on the bottle can be regarded as
real ingredients, but these spices from exotic locales also locate Bombay
Sapphire within the same imaginary of empire that the other ‘heritage
cues’ also point to, so that the entire bottle of Bombay Sapphire becomes
an indexical icon of the empire (Tyler Curtain, personal communication).
This is underlined by the way the places these ten botanicals come from
are described:
Almonds from Spain
Angelica (root) from Saxony
Lemon Peel from Spain
Coriander (seeds) from Morocco
Liquorice from China
Cassia-Bark from Indo-China
Juniper Berries from Italy
Cubeb Berries from Java
Orris (Iris Root) from Italy
Grains of Paradise from West Africa
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 80
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 80
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:26 AM
GIN
81
While none of these places were noted colonies of the British empire, they
are nevertheless located within a general imaginative geography of empire
by describing them using archaic imperial-era names (not Indonesia but
Indo-China, Java: hardly a single country that has undergone a postcolonial
revolution is called by its contemporary name).
It’s the lava: The emergence of
artisanal gins and vodkas
Following in the footsteps of Bombay Sapphire, there has been in recent
years a much broader explosion of premium gins. While certainly there are
no dearth of gins and especially vodkas that continue to take a primarily
‘aspirational’ line, there are also quite a large number that base their
premium status in their artisanal form of production (John 2007). In
effect, such ‘artisanal gins’ take the idea of retro-engineering of industrial
modernist drinks very literally. These artisanal gins (and vodkas) seek to
(re)claim most or all of the typical features of artisanal production (listed
above) that generically confer premium status on a scotch or rum, turning
what Edmunds calls ‘the step backward’ into two or more steps from
culinary modernism to culinary luddism. These include, in relative order of
importance, the botanicals (not relevant to vodka), artisanal craftsmanship
centring on antiquated technologies (the old pot still, and sometimes, even
aging in oak barrels), organic locally sourced grains, and lastly, the water.
Also, lava.
These forms of retro-engineering are not restricted to old world producers
of gin and vodka: all of these features are found in the recent explosion of
both artisanal gins and vodkas in my native Washington state, where, as I
should have guessed, one fi nds all manner of ‘handcrafted’ ‘organic’ vodkas
and gins, hand bottled in small batches with signed labels, sometimes
distilled in a column still, sometimes in small batches in an ‘old world’
‘old-fashioned pot still’, but always distilled or fi ltered a discrete number of
times, always referencing the unique properties of the local organic grain or
potatoes used, or the pristine purity of the mountain water: some even go so
far as to fi lter the spirit through crushed lava rock, even throwing in a little
aging in oak barrels to fi nish off the process! As opposed to the relatively
spare textuality of aspirational marketing, artisanal marketers speak
volumes: virtually every aspect of the process of production is described on
the label, no stone is left unturned (literally, since many producers use lava)
in seeking (natural, local, artisanal) source indexicals however indiscernible
their ultimate effect on product qualities.
We have already seen the hybrid semiotic role that botanicals play in
Bombay Sapphire, both locating the gin’s distinctive taste within a natural
and artisanal discourse of culinary luddism, but also serving as aspirational
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 81
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 81
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
82
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
‘heritage cues’ implying a mythical imperial genealogy for the drink (by
indexing exotic colonial locales whose names are given as they were in
the colonial period: colonial ‘Indo-China’ and ‘Java’ but never modern
‘Indonesia’). The same is true of other gins; all of them are grounded
in the strongly distinctive qualities of their botanical mix, each of them
apparently adding some distinctive ‘signature’ botanical which no other
gin manufacturer uses. Some of them use botanicals not only for their
distinctive fl avour, but also to indexically ground the product in a specifi c
locality. The gin Caorunn, for example, uses botanicals to ground itself
not in an imperial imaginary of exotic elsewheres, but in a strongly localist
and yet still exotic ‘Celtic Tradition’ (of gin manufacturing!), including not
only the botanicals traditionally associated with gin, but also ‘fi ve very
special ingredients that grow profusely in the countryside surrounding the
distillery’. 6
If the discourse emphasizing the botanicals takes us into familiar
territory of culinary luddism emphasizing natural ingredients, then the
resurrection of the old pot still takes us into the territory of artisanal
craftsmanship. Virtually all premium gin-makers start with an anonymous,
deterritorialized, industrial input, relatively pure neutral grain spirit. In
fact, the ‘anonymity’ of this industrial product in terms of the source and
kind of raw materials used is linked to the anonymity of its producer. In
early modern Britain, distillers of neutral grain spirit (‘malt distillers’) were
a small number of generally large and wealthy industrial fi rms who had the
capital to invest in and monopolize what was a costly industrial process.
These were separated from much larger number of smaller ‘compound
distillers’ who purchased proof spirits from these monopolists and added
the botanicals in a fi nal distillation (Dillon 2002: 75). For much gin and
vodka production, this basic division between large industrial producers
of neutral grain spirits and smaller ‘compound distillers’ who produce the
fi nal branded product appears to still be the rule (Hess 2001).
Inadvertently following a grand old tradition, many of these modern
‘artisanal distillers’ (the ones that don’t make their own neutral spirit
from scratch, and if they did, they would certainly brag about this like the
Washington State artisanal distillers do), then, take this ‘industrial’ product
and reground it indexically at the last minute in artisanal ‘batch’ technology
by using an old pot still as the last stage of their production process (none
of these are Genevers or ‘Old Tom Gins’ which really are , one supposes,
artisanal). 7 The artisanal technology (old pot still) is indexically aligned
with nature (the botanicals) by being the very technology that is used to
infuse the neutral grain spirit with botanicals. While the neutral grain spirit
is produced anonymously by column stills, the old pot stills used at the end
of the production process are always antiques, sometimes even named. The
‘lovingly crafted’ Celtic gin Caorunn, for example, uses a ‘a unique vapour
infusion method’ where ‘ an exceptionally pure neutral grain spirit is heated
to vapour in a special still called a Copper Berry Chamber, made in the
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 82
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 82
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
GIN
83
1920’s’; Martin Miller’s Gin, also a newcomer, uses ‘traditional methods
and craftsmanship’, embodied in ‘“Angela”, a century old gem of a copper
pot still, . . . the star of the show’ where ‘before distillation, the grain spirit
and the botanicals are left to steep overnight in her generous expanse’;
‘Hendrick’s is handcrafted in small batches in an original 19th century pot
still, acquired by William Grant and Sons in the 1960s. The botanicals are
charged in the still along with a 98% exceptionally pure neutral grain spirit
the day before distilling and allowed to steep until distilling itself begins’;
‘Whitley Neill is a handcrafted gin made from a 100% grain spirit which
is steeped with the botanicals prior to distillation in antique copper pot
stills.’ 8 And so on, wherever we go, the same story appears, a neutral grain
spirit produced by the newer method of technology is regrounded in an
artisanal milieu at the last step mediated by an antique copper pot still. The
linkage between nature (the botanicals) and traditional craftsmanship (the
old pot still) is not merely iconic, but indexical; the botanicals are added to
the industrial product using a luddite technology.
Lastly, there is the place where gin marketing overlaps with vodka
connoisseurship, namely, the water (and sometimes, albeit rarely, making
claims about the source qualities of the mash that have somehow been
preserved over a process of multiple distillations).
Since a neutral grain spirit is so . . . uh . . . neutral, it not only has
no distinguishing characteristics, but there also isn’t much difference of
what might be produced from one distiller to the next. Because of this,
few vodka labels actually distill their own NGS. In the US, there are four
distillers who produce about 99% of the NGS that is used to make vodka
in the US. In Finland, Germany, and Sweden, the government actually
owns the distilling process, and produces all of the NGS that might be
used to make vodka in those countries? What then is it that makes one
vodka different from another? In a word, water. (Hess 2001)
Vodka producers and marketers (who, basically, are marketing gin without
the botanicals, according to virtually all gin connoisseurs and producers
(John 2007: 59, Matus 2011)) are forced to rely on the distinctiveness and
purity of their water and occasional references to retained characteristics of
the mash to individuate their products. All this while they obsessively talk
about the processes of multiple distillation (whether using old-fashioned pot
stills or not) and purifi cation (whether or not crushed lava rock is involved)
that should, in principle, remove or erase these properties.
In a sense, there is no real contradiction here: it is the nature of a non-
qualitative form of distinction (cryptoqualisigns) that one can talk about it (it
is something that is relayed discursively, after all) without there necessarily
being any discernible qualitative difference in the resultant product. Potato
vodka, one supposes, will always really be potato vodka as opposed to grain
vodka (a source-identifying indexical relation: it really is vodka made from
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 83
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 83
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
84
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
potatoes and not grain) whether or not is any sensible correlate (qualisign:
compare gin botanicals, you wouldn’t add those if they had no effect on the
taste, usually), just as it will be organic so far as those were organic potatoes,
local insofar as those were local potatoes (even if you can’t taste the organic
localness of the potatoes, or even the potatoeness of the potatoes, especially
after rectifi cation). It doesn’t matter that rectifi cation and purifi cation
should render those properties ‘neutral’ (indiscernible). In a manner akin
to the non-product claims of aspirational marketing, artisanal marketing
involves considerable talk about properties of products that are potentially
non-discernable, but presumably no less ‘real’ for all that (if you really did
use an old pot still, if you really did use lava in the fi ltration process, etc.).
Since these indiscernibles need to be relayed discursively anyway, the point
is to re-engineer production to proliferate the talking points, and hopefully
have a few that your competitors don’t.
Given the way that some gin connoisseurs treat vodka somewhat
contemptuously as being a propertyless input (‘neutral grain spirit’) to the
process of making distinctive gins (using the formula vodka + botanicals
= gin) (John 2007, Matus 2011), it is not surprising that many vodka
connoisseurs hotly dispute that there is any such thing as ‘neutral grain
spirit’. An example of this would be the Idaho brand 44 north, which
distinguishes itself with a localist, artisanal craft discourse, treating the
very idea of ‘neutral grain spirit’ as a myth propagated by the culinary
modernist enemy (even though, interestingly, this is a fl avoured vodka,
which, one supposes, is basically what gin is as a ‘compound spirit’):
NEUTRAL? There is no such thing as Neutral. This is why you should
never buy vodka made from industrially sourced neutral grain spirits.
That’s the big-box-discount-store version of vodka. Many well known
vodka brands are made from factory-made neutral grain spirits that
are over-distilled, treated, repackaged, artifi cially fl avored, and even
colored. Don’t compromise. Drink vodkas that are produced and bottled
at their source. And, what can be better than vodka made from Idaho’s
earth and sky? 9
Other vodka marketers are happy to abandon claims to the distinctive
properties of their organic inputs and to delegate distinctiveness to the
water along with a distinctive bottle (Crystal Head vodka, for example, is
bottled in a crystal skull) (Hess 2001). A whole series of premium vodkas
are made in Newfoundland, for example, that rely on the ‘purest water on
earth’, that found in icebergs, to market their respective versions of Neutral
Grain Spirit, while Washington State organic vodka marketers usually talk
up their pristine mountain water along with a good many other things. 10
‘It’s the water’, is, of course, the most common single way to ground almost
any drink in natural terroir , since not only vodkas and gins, but beers and
other drinks, almost all require an admixture of water, and water, as we
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 84
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 84
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
GIN
85
will see, is almost a central emblem of ‘the natural’. Water, as we will see
in the next chapter, has moved from being a merely pure ingredient to one
with advertisable marketable distinctiveness.
Unlike vodka, which has few other forms of natural distinctiveness on
which to pin a discourse of natural distinction, this is the weakest card
in the gin hand compared with the obvious taste of botanicals, but that
does not mean that it is not part of the discourse: when dealing with
non-discernable forms of differentiation, the more the merrier. Caorunn
reinforces its ‘Celticity’ by being ‘Reduced with pure, soft Scottish water’;
Plymouth Gin, one of the few that has the legal equivalent of protection as
a DOP (legally, Plymouth Gin can only be made in Plymouth) reinforces
its terroir by using only local ‘pure water from Dartmoor’. However, the
function of water can not only be used to link gin indexically to a locality,
but it can also be foregrounded as a property in itself, in which case one
might look for waters (and lavas!) that have the desired properties from far
afi eld, Miller’s Gin, for example, used ‘what is considered to be the purest
water on the planet. Filtered through lava formed millions of years ago,
Icelandic glacial water imparts a freshness and smoothness to the taste of
Martin Miller’s whilst also contributing greatly to its much vaunted silky
texture.’ 11 Here, both vodka and gin manufacturing in the present day
(just as martini mixing did in the 1970s) turn to a once forgotten element
that has in recent years achieved a certain salience on its own behalf as a
commodity, water, the topic of the next chapter.
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 85
9781441160188_Ch03_Final_txt_print.indd 85
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:29:27 AM
CHAPTER FOUR
Water
As Richard Wilk (2006) has recently argued, the global traffi c in bottled
water, a substance that, after all, literally falls from the sky for free,
illustrates better than any other single commodity the contradictions of
late capitalism. As Wilk shows, each individual bottle of water condenses a
social ontology shot through with antinomies: contradictory attitudes about
nature and technology, the state and the market, public infrastructures and
private fi rms, and provides ample illustrations of the very obvious material
differences between the First and Third World economies. I wish to argue
here that bottled water also illustrates the opposition between socialist and
capitalist forms of commodity, which in this chapter will take the concrete
form of two different kinds of bottled water that can now be found marketed
side by side in postsocialist Georgia and Russia. On the one hand, there are
natural mineral waters like the Georgian mineral water Borjomi, once the
most recognizable socialist product name and most popular mineral water,
and on the other hand, there are purifi ed bottled waters like the international
brand BonAqua (elsewhere Dasani ), marketed by the Coca-Cola company,
or Aqua Minerale (elsewhere Aquafi na ), marketed by Pepsi.
Since the nineteenth century, the Georgian mineral water Borjomi,
associated generally with the natural beauty of the Caucasus and specifi cally
a premier Russian imperial spa, socialist health resort and now a national
park of the same name (Van Assche et al. forthcoming), has a virtually
uncontested prestige in postsocialist spaces. In any given place in the Soviet
Union, there would be two kinds of mineral water for sale, one would be a
local variety, the other would be Borjomi (IMD 2006: 2). Natural mineral
waters like Borjomi are sold at least in part on the basis of their inherent
distinctive ‘natural’ properties, which is why the trade in mineral water
should not be confl ated with the trade in ‘purifi ed’ still bottled waters,
represented by Western brands like Coca-Cola’s BonAqua (marketed in
the West as Dasani) or Pepsi’s Aqua Minerale (marketed in the West as
Aquafi na) (henceforth BonAqua will stand for all of these unless I am
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 86
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 86
2/21/2001 11:30:36 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:36 AM
WATER
87
speaking about a specifi c brand), which are a new kind of product both in
capitalist and in the postsocialist space: both brands, as well as the product
type itself, were introduced only in the 1990s, and both refl ect tastes that
are as distinctively American as Borjomi is distinctively Soviet (Green and
Green 1985: 130–2, 164–5).
These two socialist and capitalist products, with different genealogies and
tastes, confronting each other in postsocialist markets, create an instructive
contrast. They have in common that they are water sold in bottles, but
not much more than that. One is a natural mineral water, the other an
artifi cially purifi ed water, but also, one is a socialist brand, the other a
capitalist one. It would seem they are apples and oranges both as products
and as brands, but as I will show, their belated encounter in postsocialist
Russia and Georgia has produced new postsocialist hybrids of these two
maximally distinct orders of things. The opposition and hybridization
of these two distinct kinds of things affords an opportunity to examine
the complex genealogies and ontologies of the two types of products they
represent in general. I will begin with a discussion of the newer, and more
familiar, of the two products, purifi ed waters like BonAqua, turning then
to natural mineral waters whose properties, stabilized in the nineteenth
century, are largely continued under socialism by Borjomi. Finally, I will
turn to the proliferation of semiotic hybrids and parasites which leads to
the destabilization of the unitary entity ‘Borjomi’ and the proliferation of a
plurality of competing ‘Borjomis’ under postsocialism.
The qualities of BonAqua
One of the qualities that is central to all drinking water is purity, meaning
fi rst and foremost that water is wholesome and safe to drink. But of all the
different forms of water that fi t this description, only one relatively recent
variety emerging in America in the 1990s – ‘purifi ed’ bottled waters like
BonAqua – is actually marketed in specifi cally these terms. Unlike mineral
waters, purifi ed bottled waters are marketed not on the basis of their
distinctive properties, but on the basis of their (putative) lack of them. More
broadly, these (American) products refl ect a stereotypically ‘American’ set
of tastes and concerns (Chapelle 2005: 162): unlike Europeans, Americans
‘are usually more concerned with the “purity” and “sterility” of the water
than its actual origin’ (Green and Green 1985: 130–1).
However, as Wilk shows, this apparently straightforward and simplex
quality, ‘purity’, is defi ned at the intersection of dualistic ontological
opposition between nature and technology. The purity of water is ‘disemic’
in that it can derive either from nature, what Wilk calls a ‘romantic’
model (e.g. most mineral waters and spring waters), or from technology
(e.g. some form of reverse osmosis processing as is used in purifi ed bottled
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 87
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 87
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
88
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
waters) (2006: 308). This opposition between naturally pure waters and
technologically purifi ed waters defi nes two distinct kinds of water and two
distinct regimes for ensuring its purity:
There have evolved two distinct regimes for ensuring water quality. On
the one hand, naturally wholesome water from a protected source is
supplied without treatment other than precautionary measures during
abstraction and bottling to ensure that it is not polluted chemically
or microbiologically. On the other, water from a range of courses and
often of dubious quality is taken and treated to comply with a list of
chemical and microbiological standards at the point of consumption.
(Dege 2005: 29)
So there are natural waters (natural mineral waters, spring waters, well
waters and artesian waters which must be pure at their source) and there
are processed waters (a category including both purifi ed waters and the
municipal tap waters which as often as not are inputs to the purifi cation
process) (Chapelle 2005: 122–5, Dege 2005: 29). Connoisseur discourses
about water replicate this basic ontological dualism: natural waters are all
alike in that they have terroir , processed waters do not (Royte 2008: 48).
In between these purifi ed domains, hybrids proliferate. The maintenance
of nature and culture (technology) as entirely distinct ontological domains
(what Latour (1991: 10–11) calls ‘practices of purifi cation’) requires that
certain kinds of mediation (‘practices of translation’), which produces
hybrids between them, be ignored in the basic classifi cation. However,
the very act of turning a natural mineral water or spring water into a
human commodity requires the proliferation of phenomenal hybrids. A
good example is the ontological problems of classifi cation produced by
the technological mediations (boreholes: holes drilled into a hydrological
formation to produce an ‘artifi cial spring’) used to tap most natural water
formations. Spring water, for example, is defi ned in American law in terms
of a natural objects, springs, so spring water is ‘water derived from an
underground formation from which the water fl ows naturally to the surface
of the earth’ (Dege 2005: 55). However, water tapped using one or more
boreholes can be identifi ed as spring water, as long as there is an existing
natural spring, and the water so attained can be hydrologically identifi ed
as coming from the same source as the natural spring, and the natural
spring continues to fl ow unhampered by the boreholes. Artesian well water,
by contrast, by defi nition has no natural spring source and can only be
accessed by boreholes (wells). Since the identifi cation of the technological
intervention ‘borehole’ as a ‘spring’ depends on the existence of a natural
spring, the acquired naturalness of the borehole could be said to be parasitic ,
in a semiotic sense defi ned below, on the existing naturalness of the spring.
But many purists feel that the addition of human mediations (boreholes)
to acquire a water whose very defi nition is based on its ability to fl ow to
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 88
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 88
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
WATER
89
the surface naturally makes the classifi cation as ‘natural’ or ‘spring water’
misleading (Chapelle 2005: 125, Royte 2008: 27–8).
Similarly, boreholes are often used to tap natural mineral waters, a fact
which is refl ected in their commercial designations, which must designate
not only the place (a proxy for the underground hydrological formation, for
example, Vichy, Borjomi) but usually must also designate on the label the
name of the spring (nineteenth-century designations like ‘Vichy Celestins’,
‘Borjomi Source Catherine’) or more prosaically the number of the
borehole used. The actual qualities of the resultant bottled mineral water
thus mean that the ‘natural source’ is actually a nature–culture hybrid, a
result of the negotiation between the natural ‘fl uid’ properties of the water
underground and the specifi c humanly made borehole which stabilizes
these properties at a given moment in an ever-changing hydrological cycle:
a borehole is not just a spatial intervention, it is a temporal one as well
(Erin Koch, Personal Communication). As we will see below, the crucial
hybrid mediation of the borehole allows some properties of a mineral
water to be shunted back and forth between nature and culture, lumping
and splitting hybrids in different ways, but always maintaining the basic
distinction: a single borehole might be treated as just one of many ways to
get at a single natural source, or it might be segmented off and treated as
completely distinct natural source under its own name; it might be treated
as transparently equivalent to a natural spring source, or as a completely
unnatural source.
But let’s return to purity. Purity is also a matter of taste. The taste of
purifi ed waters is a specifi cally American taste, in that it arose in American
markets as part of an attempt to imitate the low mineralization natural
spring waters that Americans (and not Europeans) were already known
to prefer. Processes like reverse osmosis, among other things, can be used
to reduce mineralization, allowing these waters to achieve a taste similar to
the low mineralization spring waters that already dominated the American
market at the time of their introduction in the 1990s. As Chapelle notes
(2005: 162), ‘the joke is that Europeans drink water for what it contains
(dissolved minerals), whereas Americans drink water for what it does
not contain (dissolved minerals).’ Low mineralization, then, is a defi ning
property of both already popular American natural spring waters (Poland
Springs) and the purifi ed mineral waters that mimic them both in taste and
in package design (Chapelle 2005: 217–18).
Lastly, this taste for purity is a refl ex of a basically neo-liberal or
libertarian reaction that Americans have to tap water as an expression
of a more general growing lack of faith in public infrastructure (Wilk
2006: 311, Robbins 2007). To paraphrase Robbin’s essay on the
‘smell of infrastructure’, the chlorinated taste of tap water is the ‘taste
of infrastructure’, and the taste of infrastructure is the taste of the
public (Robbins 2007: 26). In part this reaction against the taste of
infrastructure, the taste of the public, is a reaction against technology
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 89
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 89
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
90
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
itself, as Wilk notes, the valorization of the opposition between romantic
and technological waters is a cyclical and changing one (Wilk 2006: 310).
In any case in most cases it is not the fear of technology itself that drives
this cycle (after all, purifi ed bottled waters are products of technology),
but the emerging fear of specifi cally public technological infrastructures
(Robbins 2007). When chlorination was introduced in America in 1913,
it virtually extinguished markets for bottled waters other than a separate
trade in water coolers (Chapelle 2005: 3–5). Chlorine was the taste of
purity, the taste of safety, the taste of technological modernism and a new
world of public utilities.
As the new technology lost its sheen by the 1970s, worries about the purity
of tap water refl ected much more general quasi-libertarian malaise about
public infrastructure and the category of public services in general. Chlorine
became the taste of impurity, indexing not merely a lack of faith in public
infrastructure, but even a fear of it. A satirical fi gure for this growing fear
of the public is the character General Jack D. Ripper in Doctor Strangelove
(1964), who begins a nuclear war because of his strongly libertarian
suspicions that fl uoridation of water is a postwar communist plot to destroy
the precious bodily fl uids of all Americans: ‘A foreign substance is introduced
into our precious bodily fl uids without the knowledge of the individual, and
certainly without any choice. That’s the way your hard core commie works.’
Certainly purveyors of bottled water in general have attempted not only
to distinguish their product from the ‘taste of infrastructure’ not only by
reverse osmosis purifi cation to remove the taste of chlorination from the tap
water from which their water often ultimately derives, but also by invidious
marketing campaigns that strongly imply that tap water is impure or even
dangerous (NDRC 1999: chapter 3 , Royte 2008: 34).
The American rejection of modernist infrastructure here seems to
recapitulate the basic argument made by Rachael Laudan (2001) in her
critique of the mythology of ‘culinary luddism’ (slow artisanal and local
food) and rejection of ‘culinary modernism’ (modern, fast, processed food).
Modernist infrastructures like tap water, like culinary modernism in general,
produced water that was fi rst and foremost safe at a time when drinking
bad water could kill you. The rejection of modernist infrastructure can only
happen in a world where these basic safety issues have already been solved
and forgotten, and it becomes possible to become concerned with taste or
more nebulous concerns with health. Concerns over the health effects of
fl uoridation or chlorination, after all, are very dissimilar in gravity to those
confronted by bad drinking water of the nineteenth century: unlike the
latter, which kill you right away, the former allegedly kill you in the long
term, and in the long term we are all dead anyway: hence, chlorination
moves from the taste of safety (‘this water won’t kill you’) to the bad taste
of public infrastructure (see Kaplan 2011 for an excellent complementary
discussion of the fears and anxieties relating public water infrastructures I
am discussing here).
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 90
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 90
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
WATER
91
Natural parasites
According to their basic legal classifi cation, processed waters are the
opposite of natural waters, belonging to the same category as municipal
waters. However, the marketing of purifi ed bottled waters seeks both
to strongly oppose them as ‘pure’ alternatives to the alleged potentially
dangerous municipal waters that, as often as not, they are derived from,
and to align them with the natural spring waters that they are designed
to resemble in taste. This ‘natural’ marketing of purifi ed bottled waters
is broadly parasitic on the category of natural waters. Working with
Paul Kockelman’s (2010) semiotic reading of Michel Serres (1982) The
Parasite, I use the term ‘parasitic’ (and not, for example, ‘hybrid’) to label
a semiotic relation which seems to require that there is an existing ‘real’
indexical connection or infrastructural channel which can be mimicked,
intercepted or interfered with in various ways: A parasite is a relation to
an existing relation (Kockelman 2010: 412). In this case, it takes the form
of mimicry. 1 Parasites do not seek to hybridize the ontological domains of
nature and culture. If anything, they depend on the maintenance of such a
distinction.
First, parasitic mimicry happens in the trade dress and labels. If the
water itself derives from technological processing, the branding and trade
dress of purifi ed waters grounds them in nature. The bottles of processed
waters use the same conventions as natural spring waters: clear or light
blue bottles (Chapelle 2005: 218, Wilk 2006: 309). The iconography of
the labels typically present a ‘romantic’ image of pristine wilderness, often
hiding their prosaic sources in municipal tap water behind generic images of
mountains, glaciers and pristine mountain lakes, but also using apparently
descriptive adjectives to suggest the waters have a natural source: adjectives
like ‘pure’, ‘natural’ or ‘prepared by nature’, ‘mountain water’, ‘pristine’,
and ‘glacial’ (NDRC 1999: chapter 5 , Wilk 1996: 310).
What is interesting here is the different specifi c images of nature that
we fi nd with different kinds of waters. Processed waters mimic the blue
or clear bottles typical of natural spring waters (Chapelle 2005: 218), as
opposed to the green bottles typical of mineral waters: the former iconic
of the purity of the waters of pristine wilderness areas (Wilk 2006: 309),
the latter perhaps iconic of the green hue of heavily mineralized waters
bubbling up at the source (Walton 1873: 23). Likewise, the dominant
image of nature found in spring waters and purifi ed waters is a pristine
wilderness where humans are entirely absent (Kaplan 2007: 695). By
contrast, the aesthetics of nature in mineral water bottle labels often
refl ect the complex nineteenth-century aesthetics of the actual spas
from which they derive: a ‘romantic’ or ‘picturesque’ ‘middle landscape’
situated between sublime wilderness and civilization (Steward 2002:
26–7, Chambers 2002: chapter 2).
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 91
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 91
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
92
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The semiotics of the nomenclature of these products is much more
complex. While it is common enough practice to treat terms as different
as Borjomi and BonAqua 2 interchangeably as ‘brands’ for different but
basically comparable products, this confl ation glosses over the important
ways that these names incarnate opposed ideologies of source identifi cation
grounded in the different ontological domains of nature and culture. Briefl y,
Borjomi is like most mineral waters in that it is in the fi rst instance a species
of geographical indication or appellation d’origine (Phillips 2003: 603–4,
Parry 2008). The name refers to a spa town of the same name, but also a
hydrogeologically defi ned source linked to a natural spring (though the
water is sourced through named boreholes) located there. In European law,
natural mineral waters must generally be named after the place where the
source is exploited, as well having an indication of the specifi c spring, well
or borehole, while spring waters generally have a less specifi c, sometimes
regional,
appellation d’origine which still requires that a single brand
come from a single source (Green and Green 1985: 14–16, 167, Dege 2005:
46). American spring waters like Poland Springs, by contrast, must have
a natural source, but since these may be multiple, there is a much more
tenuous linkage to a specifi c natural source (Finlayson 2005: 14).
BonAqua, by contrast, is like most other product names in that it is a
trademark, referring to a specifi c, non-geographically localized personalistic
producer, a fi rm or undertaking (Schechter 1927, Davis 2008, Bently 2008).
Geographical indications (Borjomi) and trademarks (BonAqua) do similar
semiotic work (Philips 2003: 603, Parry 2008): both serve as conventional
source-identifying indexicals (Moore 2003: 339), that is, whatever else they
do, they identify and index a conventionally recognized singular source.
Any source-identifying indexical involves two different semiotic elements.
First it must act to uniquely identify this source (consolidate it as a bounded
singular referent opposed to other potential sources) and index that this
particular product comes from this particular source. The way they index
this source is roughly comparable (more on this below): they relay a source
identifi cation to the ultimate customers by attaching a specifi c designation
of source via a semiotic technology like a label or distinctive trade dress to
the product.
We have already seen that purifi ed bottled water and natural mineral
waters are defi ned as objects belonging to entirely different ontological
domains defi ned by different expert regimes. This opposition is repeated
in terms of how they are identifi ed as sources. A trademark like BonAqua
is defi ned as a conventional sign, defi ned exclusively by a legal discourse
of trademark, which distinctively identifi es a source that is essentially
grounded in the world of human producers (an ‘undertaking’, a fi ctive
corporate person), and is not localized geographically in any particular
natural source (the water used as input can be from essentially any
source) (Bently 2008, Davis 2008). In European law, the term ‘source’
applied to a natural mineral water like Borjomi is defi ned instead a highly
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 92
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 92
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:37 AM
WATER
93
geographically localized natural ‘source’, defi ned initially by a legally
recognized procedure of ‘source recognition’ (Dege 2005: 30–42). Source
recognition involves, among other things, a set of technoscientifi c ‘trials’,
including geological and hydrogeological survey of the catchment area and
the terrain, the stratigraphy of the hydrological layer of interest, as well
as physico-chemical surveys and microbiological analyses to confi rm the
stability and wholesomeness of the properties of the water (Dege 2005: 32).
In other words, the defi nition of the source does not only include the analysis
of the mineral water as it emerges from the ground, but a complete picture
of the natural ‘producer’. As with spring waters (which do not require a
source recognition procedure, however (Dege 2005: 43)), the commercial
designation for the product ‘must include the name of the source or place of
exploitation’ (Dege 2005: 40).
Not only do these commercial designations identify their sources
in different ways, they fi gure these sources in similarly opposed ways,
trademarks assuming a highly mobile, completely deterritorialized,
personalistic fi guration, while natural mineral water sources are fi gured
instead as highly localized, non-personalistic geographical indications (Wilk
2006: 310). It follows from this that there are some differences between the
two that will become important below: while a trademark is almost by
defi nition the exclusive property of a single undertaking, a mineral water
source, as a species of geographical indication, might well be held and
exploited collectively in the manner of a terroir (Parry 2008, Phillips 2003:
605), if, for example, multiple producers used different boreholes to tap
into a single recognized source.
These differences are refl ected in their source-identifying nomenclatures.
On the face of it, the semiotics of a name like Borjomi is referentially
simple; it is simply a place name. Since this is the name of a recognized
hydrogeological formation, this name is supplemented with the names of
the specifi c springs, wells or boreholes from which the water derives, as we
have seen.
By contrast, BonAqua is like many contemporary Western brand names
in that it conjures up a vague almost Esperanto-like hint of descriptiveness,
which might just be translated as ‘good water’ if there were any Romance
language (including Esperanto) in which Bon Aqua meant ‘good water’,
which there is not. By contrast, the Western version of the brand name,
Dasani , is purely arbitrary, apparently chosen when consumer testing
revealed that the name suggested ‘purity’ and ‘replenishment’. The point
is that neither name is descriptive of any product qualities (therefore, not
technically referentially misleading), but both are felt, in different ways, to
be suggestive of some of the product qualities.
The Pepsi brand Aqua Minerale is even more instructive because its
suggestive translation appears to be a neutral description of the product as
‘mineral water’, which it most defi nitely is not . First of all, like BonAqua,
what looks like a vaguely latinate phrase here meaning ‘mineral water’ is
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 93
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 93
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
94
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
actually brand Esperanto (i.e. names constructed in the same general way
the constructed language Esperanto was): the correct Latin phrase is Aqua
Mineralis , while the correct Italian phrase is Acqua Minerale . It cannot be
descriptive if it is a phrase in no existing natural language, can it? And yet
with a little imagination, it is easily interpretable, in a suggestive Esperanto-
like fashion, as ‘Mineral Water’, precisely the thing that it is not.
But this artifi cial Esperanto-like name provides an excellent illustration
of the semiotic ideology underlying the Western legal theory of trademarks,
encapsulated in its most famous form in the so-called Abercrombie Spectrum
(Abercrombie and Fitch 1976), where ‘generic’ and ‘descriptive’ terms are
ranked as the least protectable as trademarks, followed by ‘suggestive’
terms, then highly protectable ‘arbitrary’ and ‘fanciful’ terms. According
to the Abercrombie decision, in order to serve its function to distinguish the
products of different undertakings, a trademark, fi rst and foremost, must not
be interpretable as a generic description of product qualities: ‘the validity of
the mark ends where suggestion ends and description begins’ (Abercrombie
and Fitch 1976: 16). If BonAqua or Aqua Minerale were merely descriptive
phrases drawn from some real Romance language describing the contents
as ‘good water’ or ‘mineral water’, they would be more approximate generic
production descriptions and would be less protectable as a trademark.
The key term ‘suggestive’ occupies the contested terrain between generic/
descriptive and arbitrary/fanciful in the Abercrombie Spectrum: ‘A term is
suggestive if it requires imagination, thought and perception to reach a
conclusion as to the nature of goods. A term is descriptive if it forthwith
conveys an immediate idea of the ingredients, qualities or characteristics of
the goods’ (Abercrombie and Fitch 1976: 18). It would be easy enough to
fulfi l the terms of the Abercrombie Spectrum by using a Dasani strategy,
that is, use an ‘arbitrary or fanciful’ name, but many brand designers prefer
instead to colonize the ‘suggestive’ marchlands between description and
fancy. As a result, while legal regimes of semiosis prefer trademarks that are
completely unconnected with product qualities (Dasani), brand designers
often prefer to ‘game’ the system using suggestive trademarks and trade
dress, helping to lead to the empirically existing situation in which brands
are clearly distinguishable by consumers who have essentially no idea of
what kind of generic product each brand represents (see also Parmentier
1994: 143).
The net result is that while legal regimes assign purifi ed waters (along
with the tap waters they are derived from) to completely distinct ontological
domains from natural waters, the processing and marketing of these waters
seeks to resituate them within this ontology, by emphasizing their distance
from tap waters and making them virtually indistinguishable from spring
waters whose taste they mimic. Because the marketing of these technological
waters as natural spring waters ultimately presupposes the validity of the
very basic ontological division between natural and technology they seek
to overcome, they are not hybrids of these opposed domains, but parasites,
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 94
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 94
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
WATER
95
in the sense that they seek to ground themselves in an ontological relation
that has already been established: without real natural spring waters, it
would be impossible to market artifi cially purifi ed waters in a manner that
imitates the marketing of natural waters. Thus to allay concerns about
natural parasites in the water (‘impurity’), purifi ed water is marketed in a
manner parasitic on nature.
In short, just as bottled water is divided between the ontological domains
of nature and technology, so the referentiality of the term ‘nature’ applied
to bottled waters is legally divided into two camps, nature as ‘regulated
referentiality’, and nature as non-referential ‘puffery’ (see Parmentier 1994:
142–55 on these semiotic ideologies, on concerns and confl icts about the
regulated reference of terms like ‘natural’ and ‘organic’ see Pollan 2003).
However, as Parmentier argues is generally the case with puffery, the
interpretation of non-referential ‘puffery’ of persuasive commercial speech
(indexical of seller’s bias) is parasitic on the existence of regimes of regulated
technoscientifi c referentiality: the fact that some referential uses of the term
‘natural’ are regulated allows consumers to believe that all of them are.
The qualities of Borjomi
Like BonAqua, Borjomi is the product of a long genealogy that to a certain
extent is typical of all European natural mineral waters. The stabilization of
Borjomi as a product is not merely the product of natural hydrogeological
processes and human interventions (boreholes) which ‘fi x’ these processes
at a specifi c moment, but also through a historical series of trials of
qualifi cation and requalifi cation that stabilize products like Borjomi as
goods with a relatively stable bundle of qualities or qualisigns that locate it
within a changing space of goods (Callon et al. 2002).
Inadvertently, I played a minor role in the process of requalifi cation of
Borjomi from socialist to capitalist good. In summer, 1992, during the
fi rst months of my fi rst fi eldwork trip to Georgia, I was asked to consult
frequently on matters of translation to English. I was asked, in particular,
to help translate the label of the well-known ‘Borjomi’ mineral water into
English. The task was simple: I was given a list of Georgian adjectives,
and asked to check that the chosen English translation was idiomatic. The
adjectives were, if I recall correctly ‘natural’, ‘mineral’ and ‘medicinal’.
I balked at the last of these, not because ‘medicinal’ wasn’t a perfectly good
translation for Georgian samk’urnalo , but because I wondered whether
it was wise to include it on the label alongside the other adjectives, like
‘mineral’ or ‘natural’ that made no similar therapeutic claims.
Each of these adjectives, the stable bundle of qualities of late socialist
Borjomi, is the precipitate a long series of processes of qualifi cation and
requalifi cation arising at the conjuncture of modern discourses of medicine,
chemistry and natural history from the seventeenth–nineteenth centuries.
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 95
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 95
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
96
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
However, while these adjectives became stabilized in collocations like
‘natural medicinal mineral waters’ for describing the phenomenon from
at least the seventeenth century if not before, the qualities of the waters
these terms picked out changed through the period. As Hamlin (1990b)
shows for the emerging ‘science of impurity’ as a whole, this is a story of
professionals on the make and disciplinary authority in the making as well,
so the story of the stabilization of natural mineral water as a category is
not only the story of the trials of qualifi cation and requalifi cation of this
singular object, but also of the competing disciplinary authorities for whom
this object represented a kind of contested ‘turf’.
Medicinal
First, let us take the adjective I balked at, ‘medicinal’. The very fact that
I balked at this adjective alone is a fairly clear indication of the central
differences in taste and classifi cation between mineral waters in the West
and the East (I leave the ambivalent position of contemporary Europe
out of the picture here to simplify an already complex narrative, but see
Green and Green 1985). Many Russians and Georgian prize the strongly
mineralized taste of Borjomi even today because the strong taste is felt
to be a sign of its medicinal properties. By contrast, American spring
and purifi ed waters have a much lower mineralization, pointing to their
primary classifi cation as food items (table waters). Part of the reason for
this difference in the valuation of taste has to do with the early collapse
(in the United States, but not the Soviet Union) of the nineteenth-
century medical discourse that favoured strong-tasting waters with high
mineralizations, leaving their taste as table waters as a more salient feature
(Chapelle 2005: 20).
In the nineteenth century, the legitimation of mineral waters as medicinal
cures increasingly depended on being requalifi ed from a ‘cure-all’ to a
‘specifi c’ treatment for specifi c medical problems (Chapelle 2005: 64–5,
112). Because they were classifi ed as medicinal specifi cs, a much wider
array of mineral waters with different tastes and presumably, medicinal
effects, were being drunk and marketed than today:
Medicinal powers were claimed for thousands of springs throughout
Europe, and their waters possessed a great range of compositions and
properties. Some were hot, others unusually cold; some smelt strongly,
often of hydrogen sulphide, others had the bitter taste of dissolved
chlorides and sulphates, or the sprightliness of dissolved carbonic acid.
There was a similar range of medical effects: many saline springs worked
as gentle purgatives; sulphurous springs were recommended for skin
conditions; chalybeate or iron-containing waters restored patients to
former vigour. (Hamlin 1990b: 17)
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 96
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 96
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
WATER
97
Claims to ‘specifi city’ could be located both in terms of clinical testimonials
as well as chemical analysis (Chambers 2002: 61), but increasingly in the
nineteenth century, it became essential to ground the effi cacy of any mineral
water for a specifi c disease in its chemical contents (Chambers 2002: 61–6),
giving chemists considerable authority in detecting medical fraud (Hamlin
1990a: 72). The grounding of the specifi c cure in chemical analysis not only
attests to growing perceived authority of chemists over physicians (Hamlin
1990a: 74), but also to the way that chemical analysis could materially and
semiotically ‘blackbox’ the medical effects of mineral water, allowing the
cure to be materially and semiotically separated from the context of the spa,
bottled, exported, and even imitated artifi cially (Hamlin 1990b: 54–8).
Physicians (who often worked at local spas) and spa owners tended to
counter this chemical reductionism with holism, claiming that the ‘medicinal
properties of any spring were unique, irreducible, and inimitable’, and
which ‘had to be taken as part of a complete spa regimen, and that the
amenities of the spa – scenery, food, peace, amusement – were as much
a part of the effect as were the material effects of the waters’ (Hamlin
1990a: 70–1). Like the spa, the spa waters themselves were a holistic unity
given by the bounteous hand of Nature whose chemical analysis would be
always incomplete and whose artifi cial synthesis was diffi cult or impossible
(Hamlin 1990a: 70–1).
However, soon after nineteenth-century chemistry solidifi ed its hold
over mineral water discourse, the medicinal virtues of these waters
began to collapse in the twentieth century. As Western medical discourse
demedicalized mineral spas and waters, the adjective ‘medicinal’ vanished
from mineral water discourse in the United States as synonymous with
fraudulent ‘cure-all’ ‘patent medicines’ (Chapelle 2005: 20–1). More
generally in Europe as well, making specifi c therapeutic claims has become
in general banned from mineral water labels (Dege 2005: 37, 41, 70).
Such a change, however, did not happen in the territories of the Soviet
Union until well after its collapse. Under socialism, mineral waters like
Borjomi were strongly medicalized and their specifi c therapeutic value
was not only stipulated on their product packaging, but unlike in Europe,
the bottled waters themselves remained grounded in an extensive socialist
health resort network, the subject of a whole socialist science of kurortologia
(‘resortology’), affording a wide array of spa treatments that included
taking waters at the source, representing a great socialist achievement of
emancipating what had previously been a primarily aristocratic activity
and making it available to the whole socialist people. The centre of the
Soviet spa network was in Georgia, ‘the land of health resorts’, which at
the end of socialism boasted 263 health resorts dedicated to various forms
of climatic and water treatment, and of these Borjomi was the crown jewel
(Vadachkoria et al. 1987: 256–60).
Borjomi’s high mineralization gave it a distinctive taste that many
consumers associate with its therapeutic value. By contrast, many newer
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 97
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 97
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
98
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
postsocialist Georgian brands of mineral waters (Nabeghlavi, Likani)
(all of which derive, like Borjomi, from natural sources in this extensive
socialist period health resort network), avoid making specifi c health claims,
describing their water, as in the West, as being non-specifi cally ‘healthy’
( margebeli ) as opposed to being a ‘medicinal’ ( samk’urnalo ) treatment
for any specifi c condition. ‘Healthy for what?!!’ one of my informants of
socialist vintage complained when he gave such a bottle a careful reading.
He insisted that a mineral water should list what specifi c ‘healthy’ effects it
has: Borjomi labels, for example, used to indicate specifi cally what curative
effects they had, it used to be prescribed by doctors as a medicine, and
everyone can remember specifi c treatments based on Borjomi. These new
waters, he complained, are basically table waters.
Mineral
The genealogy of the adjective ‘mineral’ brings us into a different set of
professional and scientifi c discourses, inasmuch as the chemical analysis of
mineral waters is virtually coextensive with the disciplinary and professional
development of chemistry. In the eighteenth century, the chemist Bergmann
noted that ‘an accurate analysis of waters is justly considered to be one of
the most diffi cult problems in chymistry’ (Coley 1990: 56). Traces of this
chemical discourse can be found on the label of every contemporary bottle
of mineral water, the most distinctive aspect of which is the somewhat
inscrutable breakdowns of the chemical compositions of the mineral
waters on every bottle. Like the picture of the spa on the label, these lists of
chemical components (now given in ions and not salts) are another way that
the image of the nineteenth-century spa is imprinted on every twentieth-
century mineral water bottle: Since the early nineteenth century ‘cards
listing the analyzed constituents of spa waters were regularly distributed to
patrons’ (Hamlin 1990a: 68–9), or, in the case of Borjomi, emblazoned on
a metal plaque on the wall of the central spring house.
Such chemical analyses not only rendered the curative effect of spa water
portable, but they also rendered it comparable. This allowed lesser known
spas in America or the periphery of Europe, like Borjomi, to be compared
with well-known European spas in terms of curative powers, but they not
only allowed these spas to borrow the established medical reputation of
their European counterparts, but also their general sense of prestige and
sophistication (Chambers 2002: 60). For example, chemical analysis
revealed that Borjomi was very similar to the composition of the much
more famous French Vichy water, as Borjomi belongs to the carbonated (or
acidulous) alkaline variety of which Vichy is the prototype. Hence, Borjomi
labels would also gesture at this technoscientifi c classifi cation (‘carbonated
alkaline’), and also use the revealed similarity to Vichy water to justify
calling Borjomi ‘the Russian Vichy’ (just as Spain has a ‘Vichy Catalan’
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 98
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 98
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:38 AM
WATER
99
(Green and Green 1985: 94) and America had its ‘Saratoga Vichy’), a
similarity reinforced by using virtually identical bottles and label design.
Thus, the discovery of a chemical similarity of the natural order allowed
the cultural prestige of France to be transferred to the Russian water.
The chemical analyses that remain a standard imprint of the authorizing
expert discourse of chemistry on any mineral water bottle are the precipitate
of long debates within chemistry (Coley 1990, Hamlin 1990a, 1990b). In the
eighteenth century, chemists like Torbern Bergman (1735–84) were optimistic
that chemical analysis would not only lead to isolation of the mineral contents
of the waters and allow correlation of mineral contents with medicinal effects
(Hamlin 1990b: 25–30), but would also permit the artifi cial manufacture
of mineral waters (Coley 1990: 63, Hamlin 1990b: 54–8). The Bergman
protocols, partly because they were ‘imbued with enlightenment optimism’,
and made what has seemed ‘chaotic, idiosyncratic, and ambiguous, appear
orderly, uniform, and straightforward’, remained standard and authoritative
well into the nineteenth century (Hamlin 1990b: 23).
However, even as the Bergmanian mode of analysis achieved undisputed
public authority, the chemical basis for that authority was eroding. In
1815 the chemist John Murray became increasingly sceptical as to what
relation the salts identifi ed in the analysis had to the acids and bases in
solution (Hamlin 1990a: 75–9; 1990b: 30–6). According to Murray, the
latter (acids and bases, what we call ions today) were all one could really
claim to know based on chemical evidence, the salts listed as certainties
on Bergman’s protocols were largely deduced from principles of affi nity or
solubility (Hamlin 1990a: 75–6, 1990b: 35–6). However, the stability of
the authority of chemists was based on Bergmanian certainties and solids
(lists of salts in the waters), and Murray offered only uncertainties and
acids and bases. Because there was no market among patients, physicians
and spa owners for such uncertainties, there emerged a double standard,
while practicing chemists accepted Murray’s position professionally, they
retained the Bergmanian system for their clients: physicians did not want
acids and bases, since they believed salts were the active ingredients, and
spa proprietors ‘looked to chemistry for legitimation, not unresolvable
epistemic quandaries’ (Hamlin 1990b: 36). This lack of certainty also had
obvious consequences for whether the fi nal step of a traditional Bergmanian
analysis, synthesis of artifi cial waters on the basis of chemical analysis of
natural ones, was possible.
The net result, for the labelling of mineral waters, is that the lists of
dissolved compounds typical of nineteenth-century mineral water labels
has been largely replaced by lists of acids and bases (ions), both because
of the change in representation of mineralization within chemistry, and
also because there is no longer any medical discourse predicated on the
identifi cation of these minerals with salts. However, the lists themselves
remain as inscrutable relics of a time when mineral waters were also
medicinal waters.
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 99
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 99
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
100
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Natural
Since the adjectives ‘natural and ‘organic’ are so closely associated in
contemporary food discourse, it may seem ironic that one of the fi rst
commodities to be marketed as ‘natural’, mineral water, was completely
a product of inorganic nature, a nature revealed by chemical analysis.
(However, insofar as the regulated referentiality of the term ‘organic’ when
applied to foods has driften very far from this meaning (see Pollan 2003),
it is legally possible to fi nd the apparently oxymoronic collocation ‘organic
water’ in packaged water marketing.) The chemical analysis printed on any
bottle of mineral water at fi rst glance looks like a simple ingredient list, but
the ontology it is grounded in is quite different. A simple ingredient list is
a disclosure to the customer of ingredients, which are obviously known to
the human producer. But the producer of a bottle of mineral water is the
hand of Nature, and the list of minerals is but an imperfect human attempt
to descry the hidden production process of nature going in the bowels of
the earth.
Like the other terms investigated above, the specifi c sense that waters
were ‘natural’ depended on changing ontologies of nature itself. In the age of
chemical philosophy (sixteenth–seventeenth centuries) mineral waters were
lodged in an dominant image of an animate cosmos, a providential scheme
in which mineral waters were given by the bounteous hand of Nature and
hence were ‘unique, irreducible, and inimitable’ (Hamlin 1990a: 70). Such
a residual view of an animate nature as the producer of these waters not
only had consequences for whether these could be imitated artifi cially, but
also might be related to which mineral qualities of the waters were felt to be
most essential and effi cacious. As Hamlin notes, before to the development
of pneumatic chemistry, the most essential mineral component to mineral
waters were the dissolved carbon dioxide gases which conferred upon them
their animate motion, a ‘mineral spirit’ ( spiritus mineralis ), as well as ‘their
most intriguing properties – their taste, their texture, and odor’ (Hamlin
1990a: 70), and, it might be added, their medicinal virtues:
[W]aters were conceived as a complicated and changing mixture
including a watery principle, various dissolved and suspended salts and
earths, and a spirit, the ‘life’ or ‘soul’ of the water as it was called, that
transcended analysis or capture. For these reasons it was quite easy to see
springs as part of the living bounty of nature; they were gifts we could
use, but which we could never recreate or analyze. (Hamlin 1990a: 71)
For seventeenth-century chemists/physicians like Frederick Hoffmann
(1660–1742), these ‘extremely moveable, subtile, and elastic’ ‘mineral
spirits’ are in themselves a portion of the ‘universal spirit’, the animating
principle of an animate nature, pervading the earth and taking different
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 100
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 100
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
WATER
101
particular forms in each kingdom thereof (Hoffman 1731: 30–1). Since
these bubbling mineral spirits were emanations of the very principle of
animation, it is no surprise they were also regarded to be the key to the
medicinal properties of the waters (Hoffman 1731: 13–14, 20, Kirkby
1902: 19).
With the development of pneumatic chemistry in the eighteenth century,
this living animating ‘mineral spirit’ was identifi ed as a gas (itself a new kind
of entity) and consigned to dead matter, moving from being the most fugitive
and diffi cult to be one of the easiest aspects of the mineral water to isolate
and synthesize artifi cially (Hamlin 1990a: 71–2). As a result, carbonation
could be separated from the rest of the mineral content of the waters and
added independently, and could be
independently classifi ed as natural
or artifi cial depending on its source and how it was added: there is now
‘naturally carbonated natural mineral water’, ‘natural mineral water fortifi ed
with gas from the spring’, and ‘carbonated natural mineral water’ where the
carbonation has been added from other than the natural source (Dege 2005:
41). I note in passing, because I don’t know what to make of it, that my can
of San Pellegrino Limonata insists that its carbon dioxide is ‘natural’.
As mineralization (including carbon dioxide) could be added to water
artifi cially, now there were two kinds of mineral waters: natural and artifi cial.
However, because the term ‘mineral’ could refer to carbonation, dissolved
solids, or both, the potential reference of ‘artifi cial mineral water’ itself
multiplied. By the end of the nineteenth century, the category of ‘artifi cial
mineral waters’ ended up being a rather heterogeneous list: including items
which we now call soft drinks (fi zzy lemonades, ginger beer, etc.) which
were ‘artifi cial mineral waters’ in the sense that carbonation (mineral spirit)
had been added to the water artifi cially; attempted imitations of natural
mineral waters (containing both carbonation and dissolved salts); as well
as artifi cial medicinal preparations or simple substitutes for mineral waters
even if these were believed to be inimitable (Tichborne and James 1883:
196–205, Kirkby 1902: 29).
For eighteenth-century chemists like Bergman, all this careful
classifi cation of ingredients as to whether they came from the hand of
nature or the hand of a chemist was irrelevant: ‘the hand that supplies
the ingredients can make no difference in the results’ (Hamlin 1990a: 72).
For Bergman in the eighteenth century, as noted, the ultimate goal and
confi rmation of chemical analysis was synthesis, and he hoped to put the
bounteous hand of Nature out of business by imitating and improving upon
her works in the fi eld of artifi cial mineral waters. However, the optimism of
Bergman’s analyses had been severely tempered by scepticism of chemists
like Murray. While chemical analysis allowed natural spring waters to
be classifi ed and compared with others, this analysis could not always be
converted into an exhaustive and defi nitive list of ingredients that could
then be manufactured by humans in identical form or, importantly, taste
(Chambers 2002: 18–19, 70–1). In addition, the increasing cheapness and
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 101
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 101
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
102
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
ease of transport of glass bottles (which also retained carbonation better)
throughout the nineteenth century rendered mineral waters cheaper, thus
removing the primary reason for artifi cially manufacturing them (Chapelle
2005: 73, Chambers 2002: 19–20, 71).
For whatever reason, by the late nineteenth century most analysts and
popular prejudices seem to agree that the natural mineral waters were best,
and Bergman’s quest to end nature’s monopoly in mineral water production
fell by the wayside. But items as diverse as Seltzer water, Epsom Salts,
soda water and soft drinks are the unintended by-product of this almost
alchemical quest, which all went under the name of ‘artifi cial mineral
waters’ in the nineteenth century. Oddly, the net result of this Promethean
attempt to use chemistry to reveal and imitate the production processes of
nature was twofold, it strongly stabilized the linkage of ‘natural’ to mineral
waters, and the category of ‘artifi cial mineral waters’ became increasingly
heterogeneous and unstable, ultimately being replaced with a variety of
terms including ‘soft drinks’ or the equivalent. Bottled mineral waters,
which begin as a kind of ‘bottled spa’, a way of bottling and marketing the
medical properties of a specifi c place, now become ‘bottled nature’, a way
of marketing the general aestheticized and healthful natural properties of
place. This change is registered too in Borjomi’s movement from being a
socialist period medical spa to a postsocialist national nature park (Van
Assche et al. forthcoming).
Stabilizing and destabilizing Borjomi from
socialism to postsocialism
While under socialism there was never any question that a term like Borjomi
denoted a natural source and was essentially different from a capitalist
trademark like BonAqua, under postsocialism Borjomi becomes a contested
fi gure between these ontological domains. Under socialism Borjomi was
stabilized as an object by European discourse inherited from the nineteenth
century that identifi ed mineral waters in terms of a technoscientifi cally
defi ned source, combined with an equally naturalizing socialist ideology
of referential transparency that required most products to be identifi ed
in terms of their nature as products (Fehervary 2009). Socialism, being
socialism, had little room for capitalist categories of trademark that
presuppose rivalrous economic entities like capitalist fi rms. 3
However, in the postsocialist period, this changed. Borjomi became an
object that was the site of a struggle between two opposed ways to stabilize
it as an object. On the one hand, Borjomi could be identifi ed as a term
defi ned by technoscientifi c discourses denoting a natural kind (the water)
with stable properties deriving from a specifi c natural source (Borjomi).
Here the unity of socialist production (where there are no competing rival
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 102
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 102
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
WATER
103
undertakings) hides a latent ambiguity in the term that comes to light only
under postsocialist capitalism: the term Borjomi denotes a natural source
which could be defi ned either as the recognized hydrogeological formation
or any of the many specifi c springs or boreholes drilled under socialism
through which that hydrogeological formation is accessed.
On the other hand, again with the advent of capitalism, Borjomi also
came to be stabilized in ways that made this term look like a legal object
no different in principle from BonAqua, variously a form of intellectual
property, a trademark, or a licensed brand name referring to the undertaking
under whose auspices the natural mineral water is sold. While socialist
Borjomi was perhaps one of the most stable socialist objects, postsocialist
Borjomi is located at the unstable juncture of these discourses, located both
as the product of non-human (nature) and human (corporate) producers, a
named natural source and also a personalistic agency.
Borjomi and socialist eternity
In the Soviet period, Borjomi water was so stabilized as a naturalized
emblem of socialist society that it was imagined as being both spatially
coextensive with socialism and as a temporal image of socialism as an
eternal immutable order (Yurchak 2006). The pervasiveness of Borjomi as
the absolute standard for mineral water, and one of the most recognized
socialist ‘brands’ throughout the Soviet Union, made it emblematic of the
socialist order itself. As consumers recall
Borjomi was to water what Xerox is to copiers. We grew up with about
two brands in the shops; Borjomi was one. Some other local brand would
be the other. (IMD 20067: 2)
One of the great socialist achievements, Borjomi was associated with other
achievements of socialism. After completing the fi rst human spacefl ight,
the fi rst thing the cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin, is reported to have asked for
was a bottle of Borjomi. 4
Borjomi was imagined as being an immutable and stable feature of
the imagined eternity of socialism. In a conference scene from the science
fi ction fi lm Solaris , taking place in the far future, bottles of Borjomi (an
essential component of any socialist meeting) are shown on the tables.
The fi lm crew members apparently reasoned that since the fi lm takes place
in the distant future, the labels should have been turned away from the
camera or replaced. The director, Tarkovsky, however, insisted that the
labels be left visible, to show that Borjomi would exist unchanged even in
the far future. 5
Borjomi was imagined under socialism as a sort of ‘immutable mobile’,
‘something that moves around but also holds its shape’, an extremely
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 103
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 103
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
104
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
stable assemblage of human and non-human actors connecting a natural
and durable catchment area (the hydrological formations that produce
Borjomi water) with an extensive socialist distribution network, and
through its circulation, helping to semiotically consolidate the territory
of the Soviet Union. As Law and Singleton, citing Latour, suggests,
geographical entities like empires or the Soviet Union ‘hold themselves
together because immutable mobiles circulate in and through narrow
networks that allow them to retain their shape’ (Law and Singleton
2003: 3). That is, the immutability and mobility of immutable mobiles
is in part conferred upon them by the networks in which they circulate,
but it is the circulation of immutable mobiles within such networks that
affords the very possibility of long-distance organization control such as
the Soviet Union. 6
The major potential source of instability in this system was, as so much
else in socialism, in the supply end, in this case in nature itself. The very
extensiveness of the uncontrolled circulation of this ‘immutable mobile’ of
socialism endangered the stability of the natural object: imagine, a small
hydrogeological catchment area in Georgia burdened with supplying
drinking water to the entire Soviet Union! Until the drilling of additional
boreholes under socialism began in 1929, Borjomi water fl owed and
was bottled from two naturally occurring springs: Evgenievsky and
Ekaterininsky (Bagdavadze et al. 2008: 1303). After 1954 additional
boreholes were drilled and the extraction of water doubled (Bagdavadze et
al. 2008: 1302). During the period of uncontrolled consumption of Borjomi
from 1954–76, the quantity of fl ow, if not the properties of Borjomi,
became unstable, so much so that in 1957–8 the original two springs
dried up, while in 1972–6 the yields of all wells decreased signifi cantly
(Bagdavadze et al. 2008: 1304–5). To stabilize production in this period, a
whole new series of boreholes was drilled. One of the legacies of attempts
to stabilize production was a proliferation of boreholes, including over 11
working boreholes and numerous abandoned and monitoring boreholes,
in the Borjomi region, each with differing properties.
Postsocialist parasites
If the circulation of Borjomi as an immutable mobile helped to constitute
the sense of eternity of the socialist state, it is equally true that the stability
(and destabilization!) of Borjomi as an object was in turn dependent on the
stability of the socialist state. As Law notes in general:
The immutable mobiles are themselves a network, an array. They are
objects. But they also pass down or through a network, held in an array
of secure and stable surroundings as they move around. If the circuit is
broken – if there is interference – then the packet, the array, the signal, the
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 104
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 104
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
WATER
105
ship, the letter starts to degrade. It loses its form. It turns into something
else. (1999: 3)
Under the ‘transition’ to postsocialism, Borjomi, which as an immutable
mobile under socialism had circulated to confi rm the solidity and eternity
of the immutable immobile of the Soviet Union, became instead unstable,
indexing a similar chaos on the ground of its erstwhile sphere of circulation
(Manning 2007b). The semiotic crisis produced by the disappearance of the
general ordering principle of the socialist state during the ‘transition’ was a
general one, as I have argued elsewhere:
At the center of this transition was the disappearance of a specifi c
agency, the state, as a paternalistic ordering principle in all spheres of
offi cial public life. . . . If socialist discourses could attribute any public
manifestation to a known agent, ‘they’, the corresponding postsocialist
ones increasingly were framed as a question, ‘who?’ The active and
unifi ed voice of the state was increasingly rendered as a passive voice, an
elided or unnamed agent or agents . . . (Manning 2007b: 177)
Under postsocialism, the network of actors and relations collected under
the term ‘the socialist state’ that sustained Borjomi, and which Borjomi
helped to sustain, vanished. In the ensuing period of ‘chaos’, the problem
of maintaining the stability of Borjomi as a singular object was the same as
that faced by virtually all producers (whatever the nature of their products),
including rampant falsifi cation of production and currency (see also
Lemon 1998). Unproblematically a singular entity under socialism, under
postsocialism Borjomi threatened to divide into a plurality of objects. In
the absence of a powerful ally in the socialist state, which could sustain
a commodity chain from start to fi nish in a relatively secure and stable
ecology, the work done by the state had to be delegated to another set
of actors. In addition, the kind of object that Borjomi denoted, the set of
discourses that stabilized it, changed from an almost exclusively naturalizing
socialist technoscientifi c discourse that treated Borjomi (as a specifi c type
of natural mineral water) as a ‘natural kind’ (like ‘gold’), to an increasingly
neo-liberal discourse that treated Borjomi legally as a trademark, a brand,
a form of intellectual property. However, both of these discourses perform
similar work, they both involve source identifi cation (consolidation of
the source as an object) and the preservation of this resulting immutable
mobile through chains of authentication and source-identifying indexicals,
regardless of whether the source is defi ned technoscientifi cally as a natural
kind or legally as a trademark or brand. In both of these situations, a
specifi c kind of mediator takes on a new importance: in the case of chains
of authentication, it was the bottles that took on new agencies; in the case of
source identifi cation, the normally quiescent boreholes became important
actors.
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 105
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 105
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:39 AM
106
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Chains of authentication
A good deal of the network that sustains Borjomi as a singular stable
object, an immutable mobile, is semiotic in nature. Borjomi, after all,
when it designates a hydrological phenomenon, denotes a rather fl uid state
of affairs, a natural hydrological cycle, the delineation of which is part
of the technoscientifi c process of source identifi cation. It is stabilized as
an object, a product with stable essential properties, in the fi rst instance
by being sampled at natural springs and artifi cial boreholes that digitize
this analogue fl ow, giving relatively stable properties and possibility of
rigid designation (by labelling the exact source borehole or spring) to this
fl uid object. However, the problems of stabilizing source indexicality do
not end there. Between the authoritative expert discourse that delineates
the source and identifi es the essential properties of the product ‘Borjomi’
(treated as a ‘natural kind’ term) and the consumer, there is a whole chain
of authentications beginning with the original authoritative statements
and the chain of derivatively authoritative reportive authentications, partly
materialized as part of the trade dress and statements made on the label
(including, for example, statements about the specifi c source, chemical
analyses, etc.) (Irvine 1989, see also Agha 2007: 205). Part of the network
that sustains an object like Borjomi and connects indexically to its source
is thus a semiotic chain of authentication, as Irvine defi nes it:
[A] historical sequence by which the expert’s attestation – and the label
(expression) that conventionally goes along with it – is relayed to other
people . . . [a] valued commodity . . . is accompanied, not just by one
special kind of statement (the authoritative testimony), but by two:
the authoritative and the derivatively authoritative (reportive – all the
statements after the expert’s, in the chain of authentication). (1989: 258)
Interestingly, Irvine exemplifi es such a chain of authentication as a speech
chain (though this is in no way essential to her analysis), a series of discursive
acts involving human speakers issuing authoritative statements and other
human speakers reporting them in events of interaction:
I claim that the necklace I wear is made of gold because I acquired it
from a trustworthy person who said it was, and who in turn acquired it
from a ‘reliable’ dealer, who in turn acquired it from a reliable source,
and so on back to a point at which some expert actually did make the
tests that enabled him or her to declare this metal to be gold. (Irvine
1989: 258)
Now imagine if we tried to sustain the network of Borjomi, or any mass-
distributed commodity, in this way, the number of trustworthy humans we
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 106
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 106
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
WATER
107
would need to have hovering over each bottle at each stage of its circulation
would be immense, a true Mumfordian ‘megamachine’ (cf. Latour 1992).
However, following Latour, we can delegate much of the work of reporting
to non-human actors. One of Latour’s favourite examples is the delegation
of the task of regulating the speed of drivers from a human policeman to
a so-called sleeping policemen, what we call a speed bump, a delegation
defi ning a zone in which some, but not all, of the aspects of the pavement
become policemen, and vice versa, and the regulation of speed moves from
the moral order to the material order (Latour 1999: 190). In fact, this notion
of authentication via delegation to the non-human is more or less what is
involved in the way trademarks and brands act as ‘prosthetic personalities’
(Mazzarella 2003: 187–92), serving to ‘to reach over the shoulder of the
retailer straight to the consumer’ (H. G. Wells, cited in Lury 2004: 46).
So, there are a series of delegations involved in chains of authentication, as
reported authoritative statements about authenticity become physical parts
of the product itself, embodied in distinctive trade dress, labels, bottlecaps
and information written on labels.
Bottles
The fact of delegation to the non-human is not a matter of indifference,
it is impossible to understand the nature of falsifi cation (counterfeiting)
without understanding it. Let’s consider bottles and other durable aspects
of packaging or trade dress. Bottles serve in the fi rst instance as instances
of what we could call the purely technical problem of packaging bottled
water, but having done that work, they afford other semiotic possibilities.
In Germany, for example, where, presumably the problem of source
identifi cation for mineral waters is largely performed by other actors in
the system (state regulation, for example), a standard mineral water bottle
form has been adopted which can be used and re-used by all producers (the
work of identifying the source is delegated to the label instead) (Kupetz and
Botsch 1999). In the absence of a state network of regulation (where human
actors like inspectors are working in tandem with non-human actors like
distinctive labels and bottles), more of the work of authentication must be
delegated to the individual circulatory objects themselves.
This is precisely the way that Borjomi producers sought to fi ght
falsifi cation in the absence of the state regulators, by delegating more and
more of the reportive work of authentication to the bottles themselves,
resulting in a proliferation of semiotic functions of the packaging which
was then relayed to the customers via advertising. This led to a famous ad
campaign in Russia in 1997, ‘the fi ve signs of Borjomi’, in which Russian
consumers were invited to recognize fi ve distinctive material signs on
the bottle that differentiated an authentic Borjomi from a falsifi ed one
(Kadagishvili 2000: 7, IMD 2006: 3).
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 107
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 107
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
108
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The benefi t of these delegations to the material is that they are durable:
they turn this chain of authentications into a durable infrastructure of
authentication. The problem with them is also that they are durable, when
they are done with their job, they are retired, thrown into garbage dumps,
and then are recycled to work for competitors. Bottles thus play a crucial
mediating role both in defi ning falsifi cation and defending against it. A
Borjomi area bureaucrat discussing the problems of water development, in
the Borjomi region, defi ned falsifi cation precisely in terms of the separable
career of the bottle:
Falsifi cation is when you buy a bottle in Tbilisi, open it, drink it, then
pour soda water into it and sell it again. All the water that is bottled
in Borjomi is mineral water, but we also regard as falsifi cation mineral
water that is bottled in a garage breaking sanitary rules. Falsifi cation is
a second hand bottle , as you know, that plastic bottles are one-use and
they cannot be re-used for Borjomi water. Such things mostly happen in
the village of Qvibisi. (Iashvili 1997: 5)
In order to have second-hand bottles (falsifi cation) you need the original
bottles. Therefore, falsifi cation as a form of production is semiotically
parasitic on an existing chain of authentication, without a working chain of
authentications defi ning the ‘real’ Borjomi, there could be no falsifi cation
either. Falsifi cation, then, is a form of semiotic parasite (following
Kockelman’s (2010) reading of Peirce and Serres): if a chain of authentication
underwrites and sustains the indexical relation between the product and
the source (however defi ned), then falsifi cation is a parasite that feeds on
that relation: ‘The parasite has a relation with the relation and not with
the station’ (Serres 1982: 33). Kockelman’s discussion of Serres’ semiotic
parasites (2010) usefully links them to the Latourian distinction between
an intermediary (the original chain of authentication) and a mediator (the
parasite):
An intermediary , in my vocabulary, is what transports meaning or force
without transformation: defi ning its inputs is enough to defi ne its outputs.
For all practical purposes, an intermediary can be taken as a black box,
but also a black box counting for one, even if it is internally made up
of many parts. Mediators , on the other hand, cannot be counted as just
one; they might count for one, for nothing, for several, or for infi nity.
Their input is never a good predictor of their output. . . . Mediators
transform, translate, distort, and modify the meaning or the elements
they are supposed to carry. (Latour 2005: 39)
Under socialism, and in general when a singular durable chain of
authentication is working without parasites, a Borjomi bottle is an
intermediary (providing a singular, blackboxed, backgrounded linkage to
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 108
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 108
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
WATER
109
the source, and hence, a singular Borjomi), while a Borjomi bottle in a
pluralized postsocialist network is a mediator (producing a plurality of
possible sources, and hence, a plurality of Borjomis). The transition from
socialism to postsocialism involved a massive interchange of intermediaries
into mediators, a massive proliferation of parasitic relations. As recycled
bottles move from being intermediaries (transparently relaying a chain
of authentication) to mediators (semiotic parasites), they raise questions
about origins and which fi nd their answers in the proliferation of imagined
nefarious occult agencies (the mafi a, the Turks, as we will see in the next
chapter) located in what Sanders and West (2003) call ‘occult cosmologies’.
If a singular Borjomi (as immutable mobile) could help consolidate the
social imaginary of the eternal socialist state as the singular and transparent
source of all commodities, then the collapse of the Soviet Union in turn
leads to a social imaginary in which the pluralization of Borjomis indexes a
plurality of occult agencies lurking behind surface appearances (as we will
see in the next chapter).
Boreholes: Borjomi competes with Borjomis
Falsifi cation is essentially a problem of parasites appearing in the chain
of authentication. Since it is a problem of chain of authentication and not
source identifi cation, the nature of the source plays no role in this kind of
falsifi cation. It is therefore an extremely general problem, affl icting virtually
every form of production under postsocialism. However, if Borjomi could
become destabilized and pluralized in the chain of authentication, the
nature of the source defi nes another ontological basis for postsocialist
pluralism, one that is specifi c to Borjomi. According to different defi nitions
of what the source Borjomi essentially is (a natural kind or a conventional
brand, a common or private property, a natural source or a private
undertaking, a collectively held geographical indication or a privately
held trademark) different activities come to be seen as either ‘production’
or ‘falsifi cation’. The confl ict between different coexisting postsocialist
projects for stabilizing Borjomi as an object, treating it as a publicly held
natural resource or a privately held trademark, a conventional, legally
defi ned brand or a natural, technoscientifi cally defi ned source, therefore
further destabilized and pluralized Borjomi.
In both cases, however, normally invisible intermediaries (bottles and
boreholes, respectively) become highly visible mediators, they go rogue,
turn traitor, work for others (Law and Hetherington 1999: 6–7). Obviously,
the most patent falsifi cations of Borjomi are those (often identifi ed as ethnic
foreigners (Armenians, Jews) operating in Europe or the United States) that
simply mimic the packaging and sell non-Borjomi water (whether soda
water or something else), under that name. Other falsifi ers, closer to home,
include those ‘in Tbilisi’ (the capital of Georgia, presumably Georgians) who
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 109
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 109
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
110
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
take empty Borjomi bottles and then refi ll them with soda water. Certainly
these products are seen as falsifi cations by all producers. Whatever the
validity of the ‘occult cosmologies’ that align these falsifi ers with ethnic or
spatial alterity (compare Pelkmans 2006), these falsifi ed forms of Borjomi
form the majority of all Borjomi production in the 1990s. However, the
most intractable and ambiguous forms of pluralized Borjomi are those
that originate in the Borjomi valley itself because they point not only to
problems with the chain of authentication, but also ambiguities having to
do with the nature of the source. Here we turn from the mediating role of
the bottle to the mediating role of the borehole.
Part of the problem was a socialist legacy of the numerous boreholes
drilled in the valley to stabilize the production of Borjomi water during
the period of uncontrolled overexploitation (1954–76) in which the natural
regime of Borjomi was severely destabilized. Depending on how the relation
of these boreholes are treated with respect to the hydrogeological source,
Borjomi can be seen as a singular or multiple natural source (one source
accessed multiply or a series of distinct natural sources). In addition, the
existence of multiple springs and boreholes can produce a situation in
which Borjomi as a singular natural resource can be exploited collectively
by multiple human producers. These two factors, mediated by the presence
of multiple boreholes in a single natural formation, produce a series of
different responses under postsocialism. First, Borjomi becomes a singular
natural geographical indication exploited through different boreholes
associated with multiple trademarks (from the end of socialism to the late
1990s). At the second stage (the end of the 1990s), as more and more of
these boreholes fall into the hands of one producer, Borjomi as geographical
indication is more strongly aligned with Borjomi as trademark or brand.
At the third stage (in the early 2000s), Borjomi as brand proliferates the
number of distinct products under that name. At the fourth stage (starting
2007), the different boreholes that once represented Borjomi are themselves
differentiated under different product names ( Figure 4.1 ).
Socialist Borjomi
1990s Borjomis
Borjomis (Early 2000s)
Borjomis (2001)
Borjomis and Likani (2007)
(Natural Kind)
(Natural Kind/Multiple Brands)
(Natural Kind = Brand)
(Brand Extension)
(Proliferation of Natural Kinds = Brands)
Other Producers
No. 25, 38 . . .
‘Borjomi’
GGMW
GGMW/ ‘Borjomi’
‘Borjomi Classic’
GGMW/ ‘Borjomi’
Other Producers
‘Borjomi Light’
No. 54
GGMW/ ‘Likani’
‘Borjomi Springs’
Boreholes
Figure 4.1 Boreholes and Borjomi(s)
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 110
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 110
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:40 AM
WATER
111
Borjomi in the late 1990s was an object ambiguously hovering between
a public natural resource and a privately held trademark. Having defi ned
Borjomi as natural mineral resource of state importance, in 1996 the
Georgian government awarded a single company (with foreign investors)
Georgian Glass and Mineral Water (GGMW) exclusive bottling rights for
Borjomi water at factories 1 and 2 for 5 years. However, 5 months later,
the government awarded licenses of shorter duration to 16 other fi rms,
to provide employment in an economically depressed area and to ensure
the use of unused ‘surplus’ capacity. Thus, at one and the same time, the
government seems to have recognized both exclusive private rights (vested
in GGMW) as well as collective rights (vested in 16 other smaller fi rms) to
this same resource.
The argument of both the government and the smaller producers was
grounded in an identifi cation of Borjomi as being in effect a term denoting
a natural kind associated with a unique geographic designation, hence,
multiple producers bottling the same water and selling it under the same
name is not ‘falsifi cation’, since what everyone is bottling is in effect
‘real Borjomi’, even if from different boreholes. The implicit notion that
Borjomi is a public good is also registered in the fact that one can buy
plastic bottles even today at the Borjomi park and bottle as much Borjomi
from the springs as one likes for private consumption. Such a view strongly
opposed the activity of legitimate local producers to falsifi cation, which
was usually associated with ethnic others (Jews or Armenians) working
in faraway places (Belgium, America) (Iashvili 1997: 5). Not only is this a
legitimate kind of production of the same product with the same name by
many producers (often with different labels and trademarks, it should be
noted), this argument goes, this form of production is legitimate because
the alternative would be to permit an unconstitutional monopoly in a public
resource (Iashvili 1997: 5).
A much more ambiguous case is the oft-cited one presented by the
cottage bottling industry of the village of Qvibisi, which is located a stone’s
throw from Borjomi. Like these other producers, the villagers of Qvibisi
were in fact bottling ‘real Borjomi’, the problem was that they were doing
it in completely unhygienic recycled Borjomi bottles.
Here, in the village of Qvibisi, for example, apparently there isn’t a
family who doesn’t bottle falsifi ed Borjomi. And they do it in such a way,
that you can’t distinguish the fake from the real, no matter how hard you
try. The bottles look beautiful, – they even have the fi rm’s bottlecaps,
the labels, and imagine, the image of the deer [engraved on the bottle],
which gives their products a standardized effect. In reality the makers
of ‘fake Borjomi’ don’t have either their own bottles, nor licenses, nor,
why does it need to be said, do they keep standards for bottling. As a
rule, they collect used bottles, stick on the desired labels, they bring up
mineral water from the valley by the bucketload and carefully pour it
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 111
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 111
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
112
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
[into the bottles] by hand (so it doesn’t spill). Such is the method, and if
you like, signature, of bottling Borjomi among the residents of Qvibisi.
(Xicishvili 1998: 14)
In spite of the fact that the villagers of Qvibisi were bottling ‘real Borjomi’
(unlike stereotypical falsifi ers), because they were using unhygienic
recycled Borjomi bottles (a practice they share with real falsifi ers), this
activity stands on the boundary between falsifi cation and production of
Borjomi.
The company GGMW countered these arguments for multiple producers
on a number of fronts: they claimed that only they could maintain quality
and hygiene standards, for example, but their strongest arguments had to
do with attempting to defi ne Borjomi as a form of intellectual property.
Where other producers had been treating Borjomi as the name of a product
that could be sold under a wide variety of trademarks, labels and trade
dresses, GGMW argued that they had been awarded an exclusive license
to bottle Borjomi, so that Borjomi was in fact a trademark. Since Borjomi
was a trademark, its singular use did not constitute an unconstitutional
‘monopoly’, but rather being a single product, it should fall into the hands
of a single owner naturally. The fact that ‘Borjomi was competing with
Borjomi’ was represented as an unnatural condition, a problem which they
tended to attribute to state corruption. 7
By 2000, the problem of whether Borjomi was a brand or a place name
had become moot, since GGMW had cut the Gordian knot and consolidated
most of the production units (and associated boreholes) in Borjomi in part
simply by successfully regulating the quality of the smaller competing
producers and buying out the larger ones (IMD 2006: 6). GGMW had
therefore largely achieved the desired one-to-one linkage between Borjomi as
‘natural kind’ and Borjomi as trademark simply by acquiring all the natural
points of access to the former as a form of private property. However, this
inherited opposition between Borjomi (as nature) and Borjomi (as culture)
would continue to haunt them. Once they had acquired exclusive rights to
the name, their very own attempts to stabilize the meaning of Borjomi as a
brand led to a destabilization of the meaning of Borjomi as a natural kind
term, in effect, a claim that they themselves were now falsifying the brand
of nature, Borjomi.
Dilution, literal and legal: Borjomi pluralizes Borjomis
We turn now to a debate in the corporate headquarters at GGMW, at a
moment (2001) when the bottlers of Borjomi were debating whether to
‘expand’ the product line of Borjomi in Russia to include both a natural
spring water from the same hydrological reserve (‘Borjomi Springs’) as
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 112
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 112
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
WATER
113
well as a lightly mineralized version of Borjomi (‘Borjomi Light’) that
consists of a mixture of 30 per cent Borjomi mineral water (notably heavily
mineralized) and 70 per cent low mineralized Borjomi Spring waters. The
immediate problem faced by Borjomi is, of course, that Borjomi has a very
strong mineral taste, making it unable to compete with the new and growing
taste (associated with American and West European natural and processed
waters) for waters with low mineralization (e.g. BonAqua).
The reported battle between the European director and his East European
colleagues is precisely about where to place Borjomi in a dualistic ontology
of nature and culture, and correspondingly, what potentials for human
agency existed in developing the brand:
We have to create this category and own it!
Jacques Fleury hit the table for emphasis, but his two colleagues remained
skeptical. Marianna Glotova, group marketing director for Georgian
Glass and Mineral Water (GGMW), barely waited for her CEO to fi nish
before breaking in:
People will see it as tampering with their Borjomi! They will not like
it; remember the example of ‘new Coke.’
But Fleury disagreed.
On the contrary, Russians will listen to us because we are Borjomi!
(IMD 2006: 1)
There is a basic disagreement about the ontology of Borjomi: are ‘we’
Borjomi (as Fleury maintained)? Or is Borjomi an autonomous natural
kind (as his colleague Glotova maintained)? The ontological position of
Borjomi dictates potential for human agency. If Borjomi is a brand that can
be owned by a human agency, it follows that proprietary extensions of this
brand can be created. After all, as Fleury reportedly argued, it had been
done before in Europe: ‘I know that Badoit in France, which is also highly
mineralized, did it. Spa did it too in Belgium. So why can’t we?’ Because,
his colleague Glotova reportedly answered, Russia is not Europe: ‘Russia is
different, and Borjomi stands for much, much more than a just a mineral
water’ (IMD 2006: 15). Adding a humanly created brand extension to a
natural kind of product, particularly in the face of the extensive history
of falsifi cation of Borjomi, amounts to self-infl icted dilution, human
falsifi cation of the brand of nature.
It appears that Glotova’s conceptualization of Borjomi largely refl ected
the perceptions of Russian consumers who saw this as ‘falsifi cation’ or
‘dilution’.
There were also issues of perception. A July 2005 study revealed that
some consumers viewed Light as ‘fake’ or an ‘imitation’ product that
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 113
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 113
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
114
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
badly exploited the Borjomi name. Indeed, some had expressed their
views quite forcibly:
There is only one Borjomi taste. If there is another mineral content,
then it is not Borjomi
Moscow, woman, aged 35–55
You must not parasite on such a famous brand with such traditions
as Borjomi.
Ekaterinburg, man, aged 35–55
You took the name but the water is not Borjomi!
Ekaterinburg, man, aged 35–55. (IMD 2006: 16)
By mistaking Borjomi as a brand, which affords indefi nite extensions, the
company forgot the extent to which Borjomi was, for Russians, a source
indicator delineating a natural producer, grounded in the real , as another
Russian brand manager put it:
‘Borjomi light’ means about the same thing as ‘Brazilian hockey
champion’ in the majority of consumers’ minds. And ‘Borjomi Springs’
just cannot work with Borjomi’s image of realness. The company had
a good position: ‘Real Borjomi is real life’. Yet by putting ‘Borjomi
light’ and ‘Borjomi Springs’, that is to say Borjomi, which is not entirely
real, on the market, the company was in contradiction with their own
position. 8
However, since Borjomi, like many mineral waters, is not marketed as a
product , that is, something produced by human hands, but as something
created by the hand of nature , and merely bottled by human agency, it
becomes extremely diffi cult to justify proliferation of sub-brands of
something which is not felt to be a humanly created brand at all, but a term
denoting a natural kind. While the new Western owners of the Borjomi
company, treating Borjomi within a human discourse of ‘brand’, argued
that consumers would accept these innovations because ‘We are Borjomi!’,
consumers argued, often quite forcefully, that Borjomi was not human
product, but a product of nature. There is no ‘we’ in ‘Borjomi’! Therefore,
an attempt to transform and requalify Borjomi waters to produce low
mineral and still variants could be taken, in essence, as falsifi cation or brand
dilution, the attempt of one producer (humans) to pass off their product as
that of another (nature). These new ‘hybrid’ forms of Borjomi, somewhere
between a natural kind and a conventional brand, somewhere between the
strong taste of a heavily carbonated natural medical–mineral water and
the bland still purity of an artifi cially purifi ed bottled water, between the
tastes forged under socialism and the tastes forged under capitalism, could
seem like an attempt to dilute the brand of nature, or as an attempt to even
counterfeit that brand.
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 114
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 114
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
WATER
115
Part of GGMWs response was to ground some of these new ‘Borjomi’
products in the nature of Borjomi (IMD 2006: 15), thus at least partially
admitting that the brand Borjomi would always remain a hybrid at least
partially dependent on the natural kind. Just as Borjomi had proliferated the
signs of ‘real Borjomi’ on bottles to fi ght falsifi cation, the labelling of new
Borjomi ‘brands’ like Borjomi Springs proliferated signs of real connection
to the hydrological source. Thus, as we have seen above, while most spring
waters and purifi ed waters that imitate them show generic images of glaciers
and mountains on their labels that are suggestive of a pristine natural source,
in contrast to mineral waters that often show a rather more picturesque,
and specifi c, landscape of the spa, Borjomi Springs is a hybrid of these two
discourses, placing the original Borjomi image (a version of the one found
on all Borjomi classic bottles for generations) in the centre of the label and
the generic mountains in the background ( Figure 4.2 ). At the same time, the
labels emphasize the connection to the same hydrological source by showing
a hydrological diagram of the natural source ( Figure 4.3 ).
The question of marketing these different forms of Borjomi in Russia
was largely rendered moot by a Russian import ban in 2007. GGMW
was forced to turn to its home market of Georgia, a market that had been
completely saturated with falsifi ed Borjomi and was, if possible, even more
suspicious of Borjomi than Russia. Moreover, Borjomi has additional
problems other than a bad reputation: in Georgia the changing preference
Figure 4.2 The ‘hybrid’ Borjomi Springs label (detail): Note the generic images of
pristine nature (background) characteristic of spring water labels and the specifi c
images of picturesque nature (foreground) from the traditional Borjomi mineral
water label
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 115
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 115
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:41 AM
116
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 4.3 Borjomi Springs label (detail): Cross-section image of the Natural
Hydrogeological Source
for mineral waters with a lower mineralization and high carbonation had
led to the market largely being captured by Nabeghlavi, a socialist era
mineral water that had reappeared in the meantime as a capitalist brand.
GGMW was faced with a problem, how to produce a mineral water that
had properties similar to the popular Nabeghlavi. And more importantly,
how to do this without repeating the disastrous experiment in ‘dilution’ via
brand extension used in the Russian market? How, if possible, to introduce
a hybrid object that was simultaneously a ‘new brand’ but also denoted an
actual natural water source within the same hydrogeological formation?
While outright dilution as in the case of ‘Borjomi Light’ was received as an
attempt to falsify a natural product, the company had reasonable success
in convincing the public that geologically younger spring waters from the
same hydrogeological formation, Borjomi Springs, was an authentic natural
product.
So an outright hybrid, a mixture of two natural kinds, spring water and
mineral water, was a failure, but a taste that was a hybrid of these two
(featuring the ‘Western’ taste for lower mineralization combined with high
carbonation) could be achieved by using a different natural source. Since
there are dozens of boreholes in the Borjomi reserve that tap the underlying
source at different stages of mineralization and carbonation, the company
simply located one (borehole number 54 of the Likani sector) that had the
desired properties (a high carbonation and a mineralization slightly lower
than Borjomi and more or less the same as Nabeghlavi). In the socialist
period, this borehole (drilled in 1965) had been one of the many from which
‘Borjomi’ was bottled up and continued to be one of the main sources of
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 116
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 116
2/21/2001 11:30:44 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:44 AM
WATER
117
Borjomi through the postsocialist period (Bagdavadze et al. 2008: 1306,
Tvauri 2002: 36–7). In 2007, however, Borjomi underwent mitosis, and
borehole number 54, which had the most distinctive properties and was
the only borehole in use from the Likani sector of the Borjomi hydrological
formation, ceased to be part of ‘Borjomi’ and now became an independent
natural kind named after the sector and historical palace: ‘Likani’. Dividing
boreholes that used to be part of a single natural source between two new
named sources, the company also managed to proliferate their brand line
and their sources at the same time: the resulting products are now hybrids
of the human discourse of brand and the non-human discourse of natural
source. Having failed with their strong negotiating position to completely
subordinate non-human Borjomi as source to human Borjomi as brand,
thereby allowing endless proliferation of sources and products under the
same brand name, the company adopted a compromise position in which
each new natural source was also a new brand, a possibility afforded
by boreholes. By happy coincidence, this borehole taps into a subsidiary
hydrogeological formation, Likani, named after an even more exclusive
resort in the Borjomi area, a pre-revolutionary palace belonging at different
times to the Tsar, Stalin and the current president of Georgia, the image
of which is on the label. An added bonus is that the new water is both
natural and associated with the prestige of this location, and few Georgians
seem to be aware that this is a ‘Borjomi’ product. However, like Borjomi
Light, Likani is a postsocialist hybrid, not merely a hybrid of the different
taste preferences of Western capitalist and Eastern socialist waters, but also
a hybrid between the different ontologies of the product and the brand.
Having failed to completely assimilate the brand of nature into the logic
of capitalist branding, a lesson that was learned with the attempted brand
extension debacle of Borjomi Light, GGMW instead elected a compromise,
hybrid position, by dividing a specifi c borehole from the Borjomi reserve
with the desired natural properties and giving it a distinctive brand.
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 117
9781441160188_Ch04_Final_txt_print.indd 117
2/21/2001 11:30:47 AM
2/21/2001 11:30:47 AM
CHAPTER FIVE
Colas and uncolas
Victor Pelevin’s celebrated 1999 novel about ‘Generation P’, the last socialist
generation, begins with a fairy tale:
Once upon a time in Russia there really was a carefree, youthful
generation that smiled in joy at the summer, the sea and the sun, and
chose Pepsi.
It’s hard at this stage to fi gure out exactly how this situation came
about. Most likely it involved more than just the remarkable taste of the
drink in question. . . . The most likely reason . . . is that the ideologists
of the USSR believed there could only be one truth. So in fact Generation
P had no choice in the matter and children of the Soviet seventies chose
Pepsi in precisely the same way as their parents chose Brezhnev.
No matter which way it was, as these children lounged on the seashore
in the summer, gazing endlessly at a cloudless blue horizon, they drank
warm Pepsi-Cola decanted into glass bottles in the city of Novorossiisk
and dreamed that some day the distant forbidden world on the far side
of the sea would be part of their own lives. (Pelevin 2000)
As a Georgian fairy tale would begin, there was, and there was not, a Soviet
Cola, and this cola was Pepsi, a bizarre ideological hybrid that was both an
indigenized socialist product bottled in Novorossiisk and simultaneously a
strange alien from the capitalist West. As a hybrid object poised between
incompatible worlds, Pepsi seems a perfect fi gure for the last socialist
generation, what Pelevin accordingly calls ‘Generation P’, a generation
which Yurchak argues simultaneously imagined socialism as an eternal and
immutable order, and was simultaneously always already prepared for its
dissolution (Yurchak 2005). This hybrid object shared the instabilities of
the social formation it symbolized: in Georgia, after independence, Pepsi
disappeared with socialism. When Pepsi was reintroduced in Georgia a
decade later, its advertising campaign, with the slogan ‘Remember Pepsi?’,
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 118
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 118
3/2/2012 3:20:39 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:39 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
119
was based on nostalgia for socialism rather than a portent of the advent
of capitalism, a terrain that the Coca-Cola corporation had since fi rmly
secured. The hybrid object Pepsi-Cola changed its value rapidly from being
an index permitting contact with a dreamworld, the ‘forbidden land across
the seas’ to becoming a nostalgic reminder of the childhood of the dreamers
themselves, the ‘carefree, youthful generation that smiled in joy at the
summer, the sea and the sun, and chose Pepsi’.
Coca-Cola, by contrast, had no such ambiguities for the last socialist
generation. Coca-Cola was securely alien, belonging to the forbidden order
of things smuggled in from the capitalist West. Unlike Pepsi, which could
be purchased and drank at will and was part of the order of everyday
things of late socialism, Coca-Cola was a strange portent rather than an
ordinary commodity, its forbidden taste to be sampled in small sips by
friends, the emptied bottle to be displayed along with other emptied out
commodity vehicles as an index of contact with that imagined, knowable
and yet unattainable, world of the imaginary West (Yurchak 2005).
Socialist encounters with Pepsi came in the form of warm, but full, bottles
(the drink was Western, the bottle, and the fact that it was served warm,
was a local contribution), but Coca-Cola was nearly always encountered
in the form of empty bottles whose value was independent of the erstwhile
commodity, which offered forbidden contact with the imaginary West, as
one Georgian recalls:
I remember how, in 1965, having returned from a trip to America,
I discovered I had apparently brought back a small, pretty Coca-Cola
bottle in my handbag. In a local context, it really appeared as though it
were strange and inviting in some unknown way. I set it on a bookshelf
at home as a souvenir and there it stayed for a goodly amount of time.
A coworker at an organization of that period, a friend of the family
whom I had invited to my house, observed the bottle with doubt,
took me aside and advised me ‘You don’t want that, throw it away!’
(Khalvashi 1997)
In late socialist practice, empty bottles of Coca-Cola were part of broader
stream of Western brands that were consumed not as distinctive indices of
products or producers, but as emptied out commodity vehicles all of which
offered an authentic linkage to the source of all these commodities, the
imaginary West:
Young people in all corners of the country used empty Western liquor
bottles, beer cans, and cigarette boxes to create a kind of ‘still life’
installation on the bookshelves and cupboards in their rooms. Most of
these packages and bottles were empty – they could not be purchased
in regular Soviet stores and often circulated as pure packaging free of
original products. However, this empty status did not matter because
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 119
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 119
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
120
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
their original meaning as consumable commodities (the actual liquor,
beer, or cigarettes) was largely irrelevant. They were not commodities
but shells of commodities whose role was to link the here and now to an
‘elsewhere’. The materiality of these objects, and the fact that they were
unmistakably ‘Western’ in origin, endowed them with great power for
doing this work of linking. (Yurchak 2005: 194–5)
Pelevin’s satirical and nostalgic novel centres on a typical member of
Generation P, Tatarsky. Tatarsky is a socialist-educated philologist who,
when he wakes from the imagined eternity of socialism into the mutable
present of capitalism, fi nds himself in a world which has no use for
philologists specializing in translating Central Asian poetry such as himself,
and ultimately fi nds himself a job as an advertising copywriter. In keeping
with the spirit of the times of ‘wild capitalism’ of the early 1990s, this job
consists largely of writing ad copy for businessmen who pay in advance, and
then are ‘rubbed out’ for their unpaid debts to the mafi a before they can
collect the fi nished ads. When the local supply of such businessmen runs
out, or when they start stealing their ad copy unpaid, he and his colleagues
devise a new scheme adequate to the uncertainties of the times, to write
ad copy in advance for Western brands that have not yet arrived in Russia,
translating not only the language, but the cultural references, of these
campaigns into a form adapted to the Russian consumer. Predicting that
the unstable situation in 1990s Russia will inevitably produce a nationalist
military dictatorship (let’s remember that the novel is written at the end of
the 1990s, that is, on the eve of the Putin period) who will ban all aesthetic
categories except a hypernationalist pseudo-Slavonic style, which would be
anathema to Western style advertising, he chooses to translate the slogan
‘Sprite – the Uncola’ into the linguistic and more important, cultural and
political realities of Russia. (He is only later reminded that this is actually
a slogan for 7-Up). His imaginary ad copy runs as follows:
Let us take a classic positioning slogan: ‘Sprite – the Uncola’. Its use
in Russia would seem to us to be most appropriate, but for somewhat
different reasons than in America. The term ‘Uncola’ (i.e. Non-Cola)
[Russian
Nye-Kola ] positions Sprite very successfully against Pepsi-
Cola and Coca-Cola, creating a special niche for this product in the
consciousness of the Western consumer. But it is a well-known fact that
in the countries of Eastern Europe Coca-Cola is more of an ideological
fetish than a refreshing soft drink. If, for instance, Hershi drinks are
positioned as possessing the ‘taste of victory’, then Coca-Cola possesses
the ‘taste of freedom’, as declared in the seventies and eighties by a vast
number of Eastern European defectors. For the Russian consumer,
therefore, the term ‘Uncola’ has extensive anti-democratic and anti-
liberal connotations, which makes it highly attractive and promising in
conditions of military dictatorship. (Pelevin 2000)
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 120
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 120
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
121
Tatarsky borrows the slogan ‘Uncola’ to gesture to an imaginary soft drink
product that stands in ideological opposition to these Western colas, a
product and an ad campaign that would be ideologically adequate to a
hypernationalist postsocialist market.
But under socialism at least, there was no need to invent such an imaginary
‘Uncola’, because alongside these Western colas there was in fact a whole
world of solidly Soviet un colas. And whether anyone knew this or not,
the vast majority of the Soviet uncola recipes were concocted by a single
Georgian, Mitrophane Laghidze (Sigua 1980: 22–3). Laghidze’s famous
fl avoured fruit waters were the emblematic ‘uncola’ in the Republic of
Georgia throughout the socialist period, and drinks made with Laghidze’s
recipes more anonymously occupied a dominant market niche across the
entire Soviet Union.
As the Western colas achieve part of their signifi cance by the way they
gesture to another space outside the Soviet order of things, allowing
vicarious experience of the ‘elsewhere’ of the imaginary West, so this
Soviet ‘uncola’ gestures to another time : Laghidze’s waters were born
in the pre-revolutionary period, they are past tense aristocratic luxuries
made available to the masses in the socialist present tense, prefi guring
a communist future perfect tense when all Soviet commodities would
be as good as this one extraordinary commodity. As an extraordinary
socialist commodity, Laghidze’s waters could be experienced both as
an achievement of socialism, a sample of what the socialist state would
eventually achieve, or as an object that transcended the socialist order
entirely, one which provided a position of critique of the rest of the
socialist order of things.
Both Western colas and Soviet uncolas are signifi cant because they are
exceptions to the ordinariness of the socialist order of things. If Western
colas achieve their meaning in whole (Coca-Cola) or in part (Pepsi-Cola)
by spatial alterity to the socialist order of things, the Soviet uncola,
Laghidze’s waters, achieves signifi cance by virtue of its temporal alterity.
Coca-Cola and Laghidze’s waters stand for absolutely opposed elsewheres
of the socialist order: Coca-Cola pointing to the imaginary West (and
the possible dissolution of the socialist eternity), Laghidze’s pointing to
the imaginary aristocratic past and the coming bright communist future
(and thus in the direction of socialist eternity). By contrast, the curious
ideological hybrid, the warm bottles of Pepsi-Cola bottled in Novorossiisk,
stands for the paradoxical present tense of everyday life under late socialism
that stands somehow at the unstable intersection of these incompatible
elsewheres. This is presumably why Pelevin chooses it to stand for the
ambivalent consciousness of the last Soviet generation, Generation P, who
simultaneously somehow imagined socialism as an immutable, eternal
order moving forward into the bright world of communism, and at the
same time dreamt that ‘the distant forbidden world on the far side of the
sea would be part of their own lives’.
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 121
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 121
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
122
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Our gestalt: The socialist order of
everyday things
The socialist order of things, then, consisted of a number of different kinds
of things belonging to different imagined spatio-temporal orders. There
were ordinary socialist things that belonged to the order of the socialist
present tense. Then there were extraordinary socialist things of the socialist
future perfect tense, things that showed what the coming bright future of
communism might be like, things that could compete with those from the
capitalist West (Clark 1981: 141–52, Fitzpatrick 1992). And lastly, by late
socialism, there were extraordinary non-socialist things, empty bottles
with distinctive labels from the imaginary West that washed up on socialist
shores (Yurchak 2005: chapter 5).
Let’s turn to the ordinary socialist things fi rst. To return to Pelevin
for a moment, the character Tatarsky has his epiphany which forces him
to recognize the end of socialist eternity and the arrival of the capitalist
present tense by encountering in a shoe shop, amid a range of multicoloured
Turkish products, a pair of unmistakably Soviet-made shoes:
Tatarsky felt a sensation of instantaneous, piercing recognition. The
shoes had pointed toes and high heels and were made of good leather.
They were a light yellowish-brown, stitched with a light-blue thread and
decorated with large gold buckles in the form of harps. It wasn’t that
they were simply in bad taste, or vulgar; they were the clear embodiment
of what a certain drunken teacher of Soviet literature from the Literary
Institute used to call ‘our gestalt’, and the sight was so pitiful, laughable
and touching (especially the harp buckles) that tears sprang to Tatarsky’s
eyes. The shoes were covered by a thick layer of dust: the new era
obviously had no use for them. . . . [H]e realised something else too:
the eternity he used to believe in could only exist on state subsidies, or
else – which is just the same thing – as something forbidden by the state.
(Pelevin 2000)
In equal measures sturdy and vulgar, these shoes gesture to ‘our gestalt’, a
kind of commodity aesthetic taken to be typical of ordinary socialist things
(Humphrey 2000, Fehervary 2009, Lemon 2009). However, this gestalt
was like all gestalts in that the same elements could suddenly reconfi gure
themselves to produce a radically different picture: now you see a rabbit,
now you see a duck; now you see these objects as expressing a bright future
of socialist eternity, now they seemed to belong to the dustbin of history. So
it was for Tatarsky when the gestalt of socialist eternity collapsed:
No sooner had eternity disappeared than Tatarsky found himself in the
present, and it turned out that he knew absolutely nothing about the
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 122
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 122
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:41 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
123
world that had sprung up around him during the last few years. It was
a very strange world. Externally it had not changed too much, except
perhaps that there were more paupers on the streets, but everything in
his surroundings – the houses, the trees, the benches on the streets – had
somehow suddenly grown old and decrepit. (Pelevin 2000)
The shoes represent the ordinary case of socialist commodity aesthetics. But
the ‘socialist gestalt’ was not completely uniform or homogeneous: it also
contained both strangers from strange lands like warm bottles of Pepsi and
empty Coca-Cola bottles, and it also contained otherworldly goods from
other times, like Laghidze’s waters. Like the socialist shoes in the shop,
these goods could assume one set of values within the gestalt of socialist
eternity, but they could as easily suddenly assume completely different
values as the fi gure and the ground of this gestalt reversed themselves at the
end of socialism.
Socialist realism: The socialist order of
extraordinary things
Laghidze’s special status under socialism lay precisely in its atypicality,
its otherworldly lack of synchronicity with its times, an association with
aspirations for modernity it carried forward from its founding moment in
the provincial Georgian city of Kutaisi in the Tsarist period. Laghidze’s
café was the fi rst establishment in Kutaisi, and probably much of Georgia,
that had electric lighting (Sigua 1980: 11). Laghidze subsequently sold his
excess electricity to the city of Kutaisi so that Laghidze’s café became a
beacon of modernity in the dark provincial backwater of Kutaisi.
After the revolution, the Laghidze family made a seamless transition from
capitalist owners to technocratic managers of their enterprise, exceptionally
maintaining control of the fi rm within the Laghidze family through the
socialist period. Laghidze’s was not a specifi cally socialist achievement,
then, but it became a naturalized citizen of socialism, and a utopian model
for the ‘radiant future’, that was coming to be under socialism, a good
that was freed from its aristocratic shackles and returned to the people
by socialism. Assimilated to this socialist narrative, Laghidze’s soft drinks
became a model commodity exhibiting the socialist realist apperception of
time, which viewed ‘the present through the prism of an imagined future’
(Fitzpatrick 1992: 217). This special apperception of time, the mixture of
‘soon’ and ‘now’, is of course the centre of the aesthetics of socialist realism.
In the aesthetic order of socialist realism, the imagined future itself stood in
contrast with the gestalt of ordinary socialist things, a higher Neoplatonic
order of the extraordinary that occasionally incarnated itself in specifi c
people (Stalin), special places (Moscow or especially the Moscow Metro
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 123
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 123
3/2/2012 3:20:42 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:42 PM
124
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 5.1 Traditional Georgians encounter socialist modernity: Khevsur
mountain-dwellers drinking Laghidze’s waters in They Came Down from the
Mountains (Director N. Sanishvili, Kartuli Pilmi 1954)
(Lemon 2000) and special ‘cultured commodities’, like Laghidze’s waters
(Clark 1981: 141–52). Accordingly, alongside these other great achievements
of socialism, Laghidze’s waters and café were showcased in socialist fi lms
and documentaries as socialist achievements ( Figure 5.1 ).
Laghidze’s waters and café were indeed an achievement. The fi rst time I
came to Tbilisi in 1992, I, like many visitors, fell in love with the Laghidze’s
waters cafe in downtown Tbilisi at 24 Rustaveli Prospect. I was not alone,
as there were always lines at Laghidze’s. As many remarked in the period,
Laghidze’s waters was an unusual fast food environment in which one
could relax, sit and talk:
You won’t even need a ruble, here you will kill your thirst and have
a snack with pleasure: hot Georgian cheese-bread and followed up by
Laghidze’s water – it really is an unusual thing. A beautiful interior
pleases us, convenient furniture and Old Tbilisi’s unrepeatable vista,
too. In addition, cultured service, culture of relationships. And all this –
thanks to non-alcoholic, more exactly fi zzy water with syrup. And what
waters! (Stanco 1986: 5)
The comment about ‘cultured service, culture of relationships’ needs
some explanation. Laghidze’s café was associated with the Soviet concept
of culturedness (
kul’turnost’ ), a state-directed program for civilizing
the consumption and comportment of the socialist citizen beginning
in the 1930s (Dunham 1976, Fitzpatrick 1992, Kelly and Volkov 1998,
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 124
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 124
3/2/2012 3:20:42 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:42 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
125
Volkov 2000). The kul’turnost’ ideology sought to rehabilitate what had
been considered ‘bourgeois’ materialism and consumption by treating
commodities as being both respectable symbols of ‘culture’ ( kul’tura ) and
as instrumental vehicles that could directly infuse ‘cultured’ comportment
into the socialist citizenry (Kelly and Volkov 1998: 304–5, Volkov 2000:
221–2). Such cultured commodities were vanguards leading the masses into
the future. At a time when most ordinary goods were shoddy or in short
supply, these cultured commodities were ‘portents of a future when goods
would be abundant and cultured behavior the norm’ (Fitzpatrick 1992:
223–4).
Valorized as part of this comprehensive program for ‘cultured
consumption’, apparently irrelevant details of decor, like the socialist
modernist mosaics and marble fi nishings of the Laghidze’s store, became
the material core of ‘culturedness’, serving to link together the moral and
material dimensions of consumption, and instil ‘cultured relationships’
into socialist consumers. Of course the aesthetics of culturedness changed
according to new aesthetic programs and ideologies, the classical décor and
ubiquitous houseplants of Laghidze in the Stalin period (Figure 5.2) differs
strikingly from the Georgian form of post-Stalinist socialist modernism
that typifi ed Laghidze’s of late socialism (on socialist modernism more
generally see Fehervary 2009) ( Figure 5.4 ). The absolute opposite of the
culturedness represented by Laghidze took the form of the pervasive
problem of drunkenness and attendant hooliganism. In fact, during the
Gorbachev period anti-alcohol campaign (1986–8), the culturedness of
Figure 5.2 Emblems of Kul’turnost’ : The décor of Laghidze’s Café in the Stalin
period (note the prominent houseplants)
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 125
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 125
3/2/2012 3:20:43 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:43 PM
126
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Laghidze’s waters and café were already poised to be central symbol and
instrument of a cultured Georgian alcohol-free future:
Fruit waters prepared according to his [Laghidze’s] recipes have caused
many of our young people to grow out of the habit of drinking alcoholic
beverages to excess. It is for this reason, that whatever month of the
year it is – spring, summer, fall or frosty winter – the hall on Rustaveli
Prospect, where the famous sweet drinks of fruit waters by the name of
Mitrophane Laghidze are sold, is always full of people; everyone fl ocks,
everyone hurries – old or young, worker or engineer, writer or actor – to
this beautifully decorated hall. (Sigua 1980: 25)
Without a doubt, Sigua speculates, a supra (the traditional Georgian feast
discussed in the next chapter) thrown by Laghidze himself would never
Figure 5.3 Assembling the socialist soft drink: Street vendor in Tbilisi
Figure 5.4 The aesthetics of post-Stalinist modernism: Laghidze’s Café at the end
of socialism
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 126
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 126
3/2/2012 3:20:48 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:48 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
127
have been a ‘simple orgy’ ( ubralo ghreoba ) or an excuse for drunkenness
( lot’oba ), but would have been more of a cultured affair, a convivial
conversation on social and literary themes (Sigua 1980: 39).
While Laghidze’s waters could certainly be drunk as part of the gestalt
of ordinary socialist things, in the factory, in bottles, or purchased from
itinerant vendors or in ubiquitous kiosks using the same assembly process
found in the café on Rustaveli ( Figure 5.3 ), it was the ambience and socialist
aesthetics of the Laghidze’s café on Rustaveli prospect (Figures 5.2, 5.4)
that was most strongly exhibited by the alignment of Laghidze’s waters with
this socialist realist program for ‘cultured consumption’, that displayed the
embeddedness of Laghidze’s within the gestalt of socialism.
Magical realism: The sorcerer and his secret
By the late socialist period, Laghidze increasingly moved from being an
expression of the achievements of socialist production, a portent of the
coming world of communism, to becoming an external position of critique of
socialist production, an almost supernatural mythological fi gure compared
to the everyday world of socialism. In some sense, the late socialist magical
realist mythology of Laghidze was an outgrowth of the Stalinist socialist
realist mythology of Laghidze. After all, under socialism, Laghidze’s
waters were treated not as part of the everyday world of socialism but as
belonging to the higher order, almost magical, world of the coming future
of communism. What had been the exception that showed where the rest
of socialism was heading could just as easily be taken as an exception that
showed where ordinary socialism had gone wrong. However, both versions
of the Laghidze’s myth, the socialist realist one and the ‘magical realist’ one
of late socialism, remained within a broader socialist framework in that they
were strongly productivist . Productivism, as a semiotic ideology typical of
socialism but also many other social formations from the nineteenth to
twentieth century, grounds social worth in material production, treating
production and labour as a universal attribute of both human society and
non-human nature. Production and labour, defi ned in exclusively technical
terms as human interaction with nature, therefore, serves as a natural
position of critique for the humanly conventional world of distribution
and consumption (Rabinbach 1990, Postone 1993, Manning 2001, 2002,
2004, 2006):
[B]ecause labor . . . constitutes the relationship between humanity and
nature, it serves as the standpoint from which social relations among
people can be judged: Relations that are in harmony with labor and
refl ect its fundamental signifi cance are considered socially ‘natural’. The
social critique from the standpoint of ‘labor’ is, therefore, a critique from
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 127
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 127
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
128
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
a quasi-natural point of view, that of a social ontology. It is a critique
of what is artifi cial in the name of the ‘true’ nature of society. (Postone
1993: 65)
Obviously, the hero of a productivist narrative will not be a consumer nor an
entrepreneur, but a producer of some kind. Initially, the socialist narrative
of heroic producers was dominated by the fi gure of the industrial worker,
but particularly by the late socialist period, members of the cultural and
technical intelligentsia, poets and engineers, were coming to be viewed as
heroic producers as well.
Both socialist realist and what I am calling ‘magical realist’ narratives
are productivist, they are tales where the hero is the producer. They differ
in that traditional ‘realist’ productivism is a critique of society from the
perspective of nature (production), ‘magical realist’ productivism elevates
the producer almost to a supernatural status (although, certainly, socialist
realism also contained strong tendencies to elevate certain producers (e.g.
Stakhanovites) from a natural to an almost supernatural status). Hence, by
the end of socialism, Mitrophane Laghidze had become an almost magical
fairy tale fi gure, a ‘sorcerer’, and his methods of production became a
mysterious ‘secret’. The productivist fairy tale of ‘Laghidze’s secret’ is
canonized in a riddling poem written in the 1960s by the famous socialist
period poet Evgenii Evtushenko, which begins:
. . . you cannot wake
The drowsy secret of the master – this is the law
Laghidze always took his secret of his waters with him
As Tabidze the sorcery of his poems (cited in Sigua 1980: 4)
The ‘secret’ which he always took with him is revealed at the end to be
the tip of his tongue, that is, his sense of taste. Unlike the secret of Coca-
Cola, the secret of Laghidze’s is not an alienable property, a property of the
product, a recipe that could be written down, patented, copied or stolen,
but an inalienable property of the producer, as much as his tongue or his
name itself, much like the poetic talent of his fellow Kutaisian, the famous
Georgian poet Galaktion Tabidze. In the transition from the socialist
realist to what I am calling the ‘magical realist’ narrative of Laghidze, the
producer Laghidze transcends socialism entirely, becoming a ‘sorcerer’ with
an esoteric ‘secret’, offering an almost supernatural position of critique of
ordinary production in both capitalism and socialism.
But the poem also offers itself as a (unguessable) riddle. Offering
alternate guesses to the riddle of the ‘secret’ of Laghidze formed a fertile
ground for articulating critiques of socialism and reformist positions with
respect to socialist production in the late 1980s. The single best example of
this is found in the work of the Abkhazian novelist Fazil Iskander, whose
novels seem to marry disparate elements of folklore and socialist reality, the
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 128
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 128
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
129
everyday and the state, in such curious ways that he has merited the title of
a ‘socialist magical realist’ author (Haber 2003). The hero of these novels,
Uncle Sandro, is an extraordinary everyday Abkhazian who is always telling
stories about his improbable run-ins with historical fi gures like Stalin.
In one of the stories, the frame narrative (always narrated by Uncle
Sandro’s unnamed nephew) revolves around the attempts of a hapless local
bureaucrat, Abesalomon Nartovich, to recover by experimentation the lost
secret for soft drinks of the famous ‘Logidze’:
‘The famous Logidze carried the secret of his soft drinks to the grave’,
Abesalomon Nartovich said, ‘to the extent of my modest abilities, I am
trying to create a drink of equivalent worth.’
Interesting, I thought; does anyone in the country tend to his own affairs?
(Iskander 1984: 280)
While the assembled company waits for this dubious concoction to be
served, Uncle Sandro recounts the story of how he was ordered to get the
secret of Logidze’s waters by Nestor Lakoba (an actual Abkhaz communist
leader who died in 1936 during the great purges). Uncle Sandro gets the
keys to the old man Logidze’s apartment, puts on a mask and gets a pistol,
and goes to the old man’s apartment and wakes him up. The old man
Logidze, having been harassed by the notorious Lavrenti Beria (head of the
notorious NKVD, precursors of the KGB) over the years, is unimpressed
with the pistol-bearing intruder, and answers the question with utmost
candour:
‘More of Beria’s little tricks?’ [Logidze] asked, settling back in the bed.
‘No’, Uncle Sandro said, ‘but you have to reveal –’
‘The secret of Logidze water?’ the old man asked scornfully. Taking a
cigarette from the chair that stood at the head of the bed, he struck
a match and lit up. ‘Remember this: there isn’t any Logidze secret.’
(Iskander 1984: 281)
This takes Uncle Sandro by surprise, and the result is a kind of Socratic
dialog by which the wise old man Logidze explains, using the everyday
analogy of the Abkhazian staple dish, cornmeal mush, that the production
process is not a secret that can be learned, written down or stolen, but
rather a product of the female domestic labour of love, something that
cannot be abstracted away from the properties of the persons who perform
it. Just as there is no secret to making cornmeal mush, and yet some women
do it well, and others do it badly, so too with soft drinks:
‘Because there’s talent and love in the world’, the old man said, ‘which
your bosses won’t ever understand. A woman in whom talent and love
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 129
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 129
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
130
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
are combined makes cornmeal mush better than the others. Love teaches
her to choose fresh meal at the bazaar, to sift it well, and talent helps
her correctly to grasp the relation of the fi re to what is being cooked on
the fi re.’
‘Then what should we do?’ Uncle Sandro said.
‘Just respect talent’, the old man replied, ‘and when I’m gone there’ll
be people who make soft drinks no worse than I do.’ (Iskander 1984:
282)
But since Uncle Sandro needs something from the old man, politics being
what they are, the old man writes something down on a sheet of paper that
Sandro can take back to his bosses. It turns out, of course, on analysis, just
to be a basic recipe for soft drinks, what everyone already knows, no great
secret, and at this point the bosses give up on trying to prise the secret from
the old man.
Naturally, it turns out that Nartovich, after all, himself a bureaucrat
with no talent or love for the production process, has concocted something
that illustrates Logidze’s point amply:
While Uncle Sandro was telling all this, the secretary brought in a tray
of glasses. Abesalomon Nartovich opened the refrigerator and took out
a carafe of poisonously yellow liquid.
‘Old man Logidze tricked you, all the same, Sandro’, Abesalomon
Nartovich said in a voice fi lled with self-confi dence, as he poured the
glasses. ‘He carried the secret of his soft drinks to the grave . . . But
I shall achieve a drink that will be no worse. Try this one, for now.’
We reached the glasses with a certain lack of confi dence. I put my lips
to the icy liquid and began to sip it slowly. It was on the bitter side, and
my mouth puckered. The others, I noticed, also took cautious sips from
their glasses. Only the cosmonaut, with his native decisiveness, tossed
off the whole glass at once. Then he wiped his lips and said, ‘It tastes of
pine needles.’
His exactitude was disarming. (Iskander 1984: 282)
Iskander presents his mythical Logidze as a fi gure opposed to ordinary
socialist production, aligning the secret of Logidze’s production with
the everyday domestic sphere, the labour of love and natural talent, and
opposed to the bureaucrat Nartovich, who believes there is a ‘technical’
solution to the problem, but his talentless and loveless researches produce
only poisonously yellow liquids that taste like pine needles. The moral of the
story is that the talent and love that Laghidze poured into his labour is what
makes the soft drink good. This also means that the secret of Laghidze’s
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 130
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 130
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
131
cannot be appropriated and made public because both talent and love are
inalienable: labour and production are made into a transcendent act of love
that can never be appropriated by the socialist state, socialist production
will never equal the labour of love of the informal second economy of love.
The answer to the riddle offered by Iskander, aligning Logidze’s soft drink
production with the informal domestic economy, as a labour of love, is part
of a common set of late socialist discourses in which the home, the informal
domestic economy, epitomized by women’s domestic labour (cornmeal
mush) is valorized as forming a kind of authentic ‘elsewhere’ to the public
sphere of socialist politics and production, the public-within-the-private
domains of ‘antipolitics’ and the ‘second economy’, respectively (Gal and
Kligman 2000, Gal 2002).
Where Iskander locates the secret in an analogy with the domain of
‘antipolitics’, the unpolluted private domain of feminine domestic labour,
other contemporary Georgians writing in the Glasnost period instead
prefer to locate the success of Laghidze’s in his good conscience as well as
the care he used in the selection of raw materials, and his strict avoidance
of common socialist production practices like input substitutions to meet
plan targets:
Where should we seek the secret of the phenomenal success of Mitrophane
Laghidze’s wonderful waters? In the fi rst place, of course, in his talent
and in his love of work, in his conscientiousness and respectability. He
gathered fruit only according to micro-region, doubtless used spring
water for the preparation of juices and syrups, he didn’t economize on
his sugar supplies nor did he sneak in leftover fruit that was to be thrown
away. This is why everyone thirsted for Laghidze’s waters. (Aleksandria
1989: 2)
Such is the ideal embodied in the myth of Mitrophane Laghidze, but this
author continues to show how this socialist inheritance was squandered
in reality. In the restaurant the author is describing (which, he grants, is
associated with a factory and is supplied only indirectly by Laghidze’s),
sometimes the water lacks gas, sometimes it is warm, and worst of
all, the selection of fl avours is poor. Of the ten kinds of cheese bread
advertised on the menu, only two, sometimes three are available, of the
six containers for syrup, three are always empty. All of which raises
the more basic point, why, under socialism, has the secret Laghidze left
the people been so squandered? ‘Why do we so impoverish the production
of the bold genius of Mitrophane Laghidze?’ (Aleksandria 1989: 2). If
Laghidze’s offers an extraordinary elsewhere to the ordinary world of
socialist commodities, the author seems to argue, how much more tragic
is it when this extraordinary order is assimilated to the ordinary order of
socialism.
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 131
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 131
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:53 PM
132
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The ghost of modernity past
The late socialist gestalt, ubiquitous at the end of socialism in 1992, was
already only visible in isolated fragments when I fi nally returned to Tbilisi
in 2001. Making my usual hajj to the mecca of socialist soft drinks, I
discovered that Laghidze’s café was one of the few places where the
specifi cally Georgian version of this aesthetic of socialist modernism (on
which see Fehervary 2009) could still be seen intact ( Figure 5.4 ). But like
so much else in Tbilisi, nothing else about Laghidze’s was what it had
been.
Under socialism there was always a line and the place teamed with
people. Now the place was empty. The marble walls and tables, which had
before made the place cool in the heat of Tbilisi summers, now took on a
sombre tone, reminding me of a soft drink mausoleum. I joylessly drank my
tarragon-fl avoured soft drink, which was as good as ever, but instead of the
single variety of fresh, piping-hot cheese bread that had been the trademark
of Laghidze’s in the past, now there are many kinds of cheese bread, none
of which were hot, or even warm. In general, the place was a ghost of the
Laghidze’s I had known. Each following year I visited Laghidze’s out of
piety, but each year it seemed that Laghidze’s cafe, once a joyous prophetic
vision of a bright socialist future, was now exceptional in a completely
different way, a lonely relict of a gestalt that had largely disappeared, a sad
spectral haunting from the socialist past in the capitalist present, a ghost
of modernity past.
Although I did not know this, I was not the only one silently mourning the
sad spectre that was Laghidze’s. Of all the unlikely fellow travellers, I fi nd
my thoughts and feelings about Laghidze’s articulated most clearly by a
Georgian brand manager. Reading an essay with the rather non-descriptive
title Brendingi-II (Branding – II, Ak’opiani 2007), I was surprised to fi nd
a very introspective autobiographical consideration of Laghidze’s waters as
a brand.
Unsurprisingly, the text begins with an utterly derivative exposition of a
common theme in contemporary global brand literature, a kind of ‘brand
animism’, the idea that brands can be treated as being in essence prosthetic
extensions of the human or even autonomous living beings animated by
their relationships with consumers (Hanby 1999, Manning 2010, on the
general semiotic category of animation see Silvio 2010). The argument
is that customers create relationships with brands, partially by virtue of
a universally human propensity towards fetishism or animism, through
which humans (in this case customers) ‘are accustomed to confer animacy
( gasuliereba ) on inanimate objects and place a portion of their own being
( arseba ) in them’ (Ak’opiani 2007: 57). As a result, ‘brands are living beings
and that which has been animated by consumers remains alive as long as it
maintains a relationship with [the consumers]’ (Ak’opiani 2007: 57).
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 132
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 132
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
133
What is somewhat surprising is that the author chooses to illustrate this
animistic commonplace of the Western brand literature with a socialist
product: Laghidze’s waters. Here the varied details of the sociotechnical
assemblage of Laghidze’s café that in the socialist period exhibited socialist
kul’turnost’ are reimagined in the light of capitalist animism as the charming
and distinctive attributes of capitalist ‘brand’. She begins:
If at some time in the past you were a devoted consumer of ‘Laghidze’s
Waters’, then, it is possible that the clear glasses, the cones fi lled with
multicolored syrups, the tap for soda water, the heavy, cool marble
countertop, the mosaic on the wall, the gentle tinkling of the spoon
during the mixing of the syrup with the water, the rinsing wheel for the
glasses, like a tiny fountain, all became for you indivisible characteristic
features of this brand. Now, imagine, if all at once we were to change
every last one of these symbols. It is possible, that a new brand would
appear. But the old one would surely die. (Ak’opiani 2007: 59)
In a sense, there is nothing implausible about her highly associationist
discourse of brand or brand animism, or even applying this discourse to
a socialist fi rm like Laghidze’s. The semiotic discourse of brand is after
all as promiscuous as it is omnivorous. What is truly odd about her brand
animism is that she talks of Laghidze’s brand not as an animated living
presence , but as an undead ghostly haunting . She continues:
Whenever I walk past ‘Laghidze’s Waters’ on Rustaveli Prospect, I feel
simultaneously a desire and a sadness, at the same time, a feeling of
frightened shame takes control of me. It’s as if I walked past a friend
who in their time was exceptionally talented and good-humored, who,
now, dressed in rags, is begging me for alms and apparently can’t even
recognize me. (Ak’opiani 2007: 58)
Here, Laghidze’s waters is indeed an animated object, but an abject object
animated by sadness, shame and nostalgia seems like a haunting ghostly
presence, very different from the livelier, more cheerful kinds of animation
that brand theorists usually like to talk about.
This brand manager could drink a bottle of Coca-Cola, she admits, but
what she desires is a glass of Laghidze’s ‘Chocolate Cream’. Why then,
does she not enter Laghidze’s waters? Why drink a dead bottle of Coca-
Cola instead of the living ‘magical fairy tale’ waters of Laghidze’s? The
desire is still there, but the place too is haunted with a series of repressed
emotions. She analyses the haunting of Laghidze’s in what is almost an
unintentional parody of a typical brand manager’s summary of a brand
personality, where the quasi-human personality of a brand is set forth as
a set of bullet-pointed and bolded adjectives denoting desirable emotional
associations the brand excites in the consumer (e.g. the brand Orange is
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 133
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 133
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
134
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
‘refreshing, honest, straightforward, dynamic, friendly’) (Manning 2010).
She continues:
What is it now that prevents me from realizing this desire? The fact that,
the moment I enter ‘Laghidze’s Waters’, instead of feeling carefree and
light-hearted, I am overpowered by sadness, dejection, fear, shame and
despair.
Sadness and dejection – at seeing a dying friend.
Fear because this last safe harbor, could easily turn to dust and ashes
very soon, for what are to me completely unacceptable reasons.
Shame because I haven’t even lifted a hand, to prevent my friend from
becoming a beggar.
And despair – since we, who secretly love [Laghidze’s waters], are not so
few in number, but why are we so sluggish? Why don’t we take care of
what we have? Why do we regard it as coldly as someone who tears up
by the roots centuries old trees that he himself did not plant? Why do we
not try to preserve the ambience of the old city and why doesn’t it move
us, when a foreign culture levels our culture traditions? Why . . . Why?
. . . Why. (Ak’opiani 2007: 58, original emphasis)
The survival of Laghidze’s into postsocialism triggers both a desire (which
turns out to be an impossible desire to relive one’s own youth) and a
reappearance of a repressed sense of loss (a repressed realization that the
socialist city was, perhaps, in certain respects, a happier place).
The uncanny relation of similarity crossed by difference between Coca-
Cola and Laghidze’s waters is underlined in the way they trade places from
socialism to postsocialism: Coca-Cola, once strange, became familiar,
and Laghidze’s, once familiar, became strange. In the late socialist period,
empty bottles of Coca-Cola had offered magical authentic contact with ‘the
imaginary West’. Under postsocialism, the dreamworld of the imaginary
West vanished as the West became all too real a presence in waking life, and
accordingly, Coca-Cola bottles moved from being spectral hauntings from
an imaginary elsewhere to being mere material containers for what was
now a perfectly ordinary soft drink. By contrast, the surviving fragments
of the late socialist gestalt like Laghidze’s waters were now haunted by
ghosts of the past: in the 1990s, ‘the Imaginary West was no longer to be
found anywhere and was lost forever . . . [but] the greatest discovery of
all was that one could now turn back to the Soviet past with an equally
astonished glance’ (Yurchak 2005: 206). The complete disenchantment and
deanimation of Coca-Cola (now equated with ‘lifeless bottles’) is matched
by the nostalgic retrospective enchantment and animation of Laghidze’s
waters, which under socialism were ‘magical’ and ‘life-giving’ but under
postsocialism instead have become animated by spectral hauntings.
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 134
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 134
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
135
Once a portent of the socialist future perfect, Laghidze’s waters becomes
instead a haunting from these futures past. At the same time, this nostalgic
discourse of the haunting of Laghidze’s is enfolded within a thoroughly
Western theory of brand, and as Laghidze’s is assimilated to this discourse,
Laghidze’s comes to be ever more defi ned by its opposition to the Western
soft drink brand par excellence, Coca-Cola.
Laghidze’s and Coca-Cola
In 1900 when Laghidze’s waters fi rst appeared in the provincial capital
of Kutaisi, the Georgian nationalist poet Akaki Tsereteli penned a poem
to greet the new drink, calling it ‘a rival of other drinks, of wine, of beer,
and of milk!’ (Sigua 1980: 9). But under postsocialism, Laghidze’s waters
acquired new rivals. One of these new rivals was Coca-Cola, which by the
mid-1990s had fi nally become a real everyday commodity, bottled locally,
and no longer a strange portent from the imaginary West. In opposition to
these new rivals, Laghidze’s is treated not as a kind of product (in contrast
to wine, beer or milk), but a kind of brand like Coca-Cola. The two brands
seem, in a sense, to be destined to stand as fi gures for the opposition
between socialism and capitalism. Laghidze’s, after all, was a product that
had a name recognition under socialism similar to the capitalist brand par
excellence, Coca-Cola.
The products are not merely similar, in the sphere of production in Tbilisi
they are linked together by real associations, even kinship. When Coca-
Cola arrived in Tbilisi in the early 1990s, it took over one of the plants
and some of the staff that had been used by the socialist fi rm that had
also bottled Laghidze’s products. While Mitrophane Laghidze’s grandson,
Tornike Laghidze, still runs the Laghidze plant in Tbilisi as a labour of
love, his own grandson, Vakhtang, is now the general director of Coca-
Cola Bottlers Georgia.
Despite these linkages, the Laghidze’s factory seems almost like the
inversion of a capitalist fi rm, typifi ed by the offi ces of Coca-Cola nearby.
Unlike the Coca-Cola main offi ce, the building that houses Laghidze’s
is simply a factory, the entrance unmarked, no provision for visitors, no
waiting rooms with photographs and awards on the wall. In contrast to
Coca-Cola, the uniform here among the upper echelons of staff was not a
business suit but a white lab coat, the staff consisted of technicians and not
businessmen, and these technicians were nearly all women.
On my fi rst visit to the Laghidze’s factory, I wandered through a tangle
of unattended industrial machinery until I found the offi ces, and then
wandered the hallways, trying to fi nd the person with whom I had my
appointment. Eventually I was directed to wait in an adjacent offi ce. Here
an ancient man was seated at his desk, occupying himself drawing various
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 135
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 135
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
136
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
geometric fi gures with great precision. His current theme was a cone. He
looked up and smiled amiably as I came in and explained myself, leaned
back, smiled again. He began to talk about the problems of the company,
as he said, to pass the time. I pulled out my recording equipment and he
smilingly waved it away: ‘I will tell you a story, but just, as I say, to pass
the time. We are talking here just to divert ourselves, just to pass the time.’
And so we passed the time. I got the impression that similarly, much of the
business of Laghidze’s consisted of passing the time.
Eventually Nana arrived, a bustling, alert and authoritative woman, and
we went to her offi ce. Nana was a technical expert, a member of the erstwhile
socialist technical intelligentsia; there was no marketing department at
Laghidze’s. In the middle of the interview we went into an adjacent room,
a laboratory, to acquire some syrup samples. In the room, older women
dressed in lab coats wandered listlessly in a laboratory, alembics and other
chemical apparatus of mad scientist vintage clashing with the houseplants
lining the windowsill. Two women were talking in a disconsolate fashion:
‘We don’t understand business.’
According to Nana, the true ‘rivals’ of Laghidze’s are not Western
branded goods like Coca-Cola, but falsifi ed brands and ‘brandless’ products
of unknown origin. Brandless goods under socialism indexed a socialist
imaginary in which there were no rivalrous producers (therefore no true
brands) and all production originated with a single unifi ed producer, the
state (Fehervary 2009); but brandless goods under socialism, along with
falsifi cation, made by anonymous producers under unregulated conditions,
indexed the absence of this unitary producer and the rule of chaos (Manning
2007b).
A chemist by training, she proved her point right then and there by
making me pour out a sample of the Nescafe rip-off drink I had brought
with me (‘Nice Café’) into a saucer. Stirring the fl uid, solid elements
precipitated, demonstrating that it was probably made out of hastily mixed
fl avour powders and tap water, with aspartame instead of sugar. I wasn’t
entirely surprised. But I did stop drinking it.
What were these ‘brandless’ goods? The only ingredients that can be
purchased at the low prices of these drinks (perhaps 10–15 tetri, less
than 10 cents, compared with 35 tetri as the production cost of a bottle
of Laghidze’s) are the brightly coloured powders sold until recently at
an alchemist’s shop at the local bazaar where all the things, other than
water, could be bought to begin a home micro-factory. These then are the
ingredients. Nana during her interview gestured at the unspeakable and
uncontrolled methods of production of these micro-factories. She didn’t
need to elaborate, I myself have witnessed the process. In one village,
acquaintances showed me the micro-factory from which they supplied
their corner store with soft drinks. The water came from the tap, mixed
with chemical powders in the household bathtub, and bottled and labelled
there. As Tornike Laghidze himself put it in an interview (2003): ‘We
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 136
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 136
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:54 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
137
could do that too, pour chemicals in a bottle, but we don’t want to, this
is Laghidze!’
For consumers, however, Laghidze’s waters always seems to fi nd its
discursive nemesis in Coca-Cola. The close introspective reading of the
animation of Laghidze’s waters in contrast to the lifelessness of bottled
Coca-Cola above gives an example of a nuanced version of this sort of
narrative. There are much simpler ones. For example, the opposition
between Laghidze’s, as a local underdog, to Coca-Cola as a global giant,
seems to fi t perfectly into a standard David/Goliath globalization narrative
of local resistance and global (Western) domination and homogenization
familiar from contemporary discourses of anti-brand activism and the Slow
Food movement (Meneley 2004). Here’s a straightforward telling of this
revised version of the Laghidze Myth, full of factual errors (Laghidze’s was
not founded in 1889 at the same time as Coca-Cola!) transposed into the
mythology of globalization, as told by a young American writing for the
Moscow Times :
So what local underdog beverage can topple the Coke global hegemony?
My vote is in for the super lightweight contender from Tbilisi, Georgia,
the green-colored drink that goes by the name ‘Tarhoon’. And this exotic
elixir has a history every bit as interesting as Coca Colas. In 1889, three
years after the discovery of Coca Cola, halfway around the world in
Georgia the entrepreneur Laghidze was experimenting with different
water-based drinks enhanced with herbs. One of these creations employs
the herb estragon, together with a few other natural ingredients and a mix
of carbonation to give it a fi zz. . . . But this is neither an attack on Coca
Cola, nor an endorsement for Tarhoon. Rather, the example of Coke and
Tarhoon provides a microcosm for the way the global economy seems
to be running these days. The huge transnational corporations have the
massive budgets to dump their products across the ‘global village’ with
very little consideration for the fate of the small local producers. This
subject goes far beyond soda pop. It touches every aspect of our lives and
actually defi nes our society and culture to a large degree. (Bridge 2005)
Rather than call the drink by its proper name (Laghidze’s), in an exoticizing
moment, the commentator chooses to name it after one specifi c fl avour
of the many offered by Laghidze’s, the one most decidedly unfamiliar
to Western tastes, tarragon (Russian ‘Tarhoon’, Georgian tarkhuna ). By
foregrounding the exotic use of a savoury herb (tarragon) for a sweet drink,
this drink now not only contests the global hegemony of Coca-Cola, but
also the homogenization of tastes that this hegemony entails. But part of the
reason for this choice might lie in another difference between Coca-Cola
and ‘Tarhoon’, namely that Laghidze labels, at least in the socialist period,
strongly foregrounded the raw material out of which the product was made,
and strongly backgrounded indications of the producer, usually limited
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 137
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 137
3/2/2012 3:20:55 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:55 PM
138
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 5.5 Typical late socialist labels for Laghidze’s ‘Tarragon’ ( Tarkhuna ) (left)
and TbilKhilTsqali’s ‘Lemon’ ( Limoni ). Note in sharp contrast to the Coca-Cola
bottle, that the commodity aesthetics of the socialist label strongly foregrounds the
raw materials (nature) and backgrounds the producer (the mall round emblems
differentiating the socialist fi rms Laghidze’s and TbilKhilTsqali appear at the top
centre of the respective labels, as they do in Figure 5.6 )
to a small distinctive emblem in the top centre of the label ( Figure 5.5 ),
which is also found in the Laghidze label represented in the cartoon below
( Figure 5.6 ).
Whatever their differences of detail, what the narratives of the Georgian
brand manager and this Western reporter have in common that they exhibit
what I have called elsewhere ‘brand totemism’ (Manning 2009b). Where
Levi-Straussian totemism is based on fi guring social differences on the
analogy of those in nature (Levi-Strauss 1963), brand totemism is a version
of Sahlins’ ‘bourgeois’ totemism where differences within the world of
humanly created second nature (specifi cally brands) serve to fi gure social
differences of whatever kind (Sahlins 1976). In Sahlins’ reading, totemism
can be defi ned as ‘a series of concrete differences among objects of the same
class to which correspond distinctions among some dimension of social
order – as the difference between blue collar and white is one between
manual labor and bureaucratic’ (1976: 180). What all these forms of
totemism have in common is that they are Peircean diagrammatic icons,
where the differences between two elements in one system (nature, brand)
are similar to the differences between two elements in another system
(society).
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 138
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 138
3/2/2012 3:20:55 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:55 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
139
Figure 5.6 Cartoon from humour magazine Niangi [Crocodile] (1998, Artist V.
Kucia)
It is important to distinguish this particular metaphoric function of brand
(brand totemism) from the metonymic function of brand consumption to
index social differences of consumers (what I have elsewhere hesitantly
called ‘brand fetishism’ (Manning 2009b)). Naturally, since the discourse
of brand is heavily associationist, it is a truism that brands index the social
properties of distinct producers and potential consumers (Moore 2003,
Manning 2010 and references there). When deployed as brand totems,
semiotic interest is defl ected from brands as indexes of different entities
within a fi eld (producers, consumers) to standing for portions of the fi eld
itself.
This function of brand, typically highly prominent global brands like
Coca-Cola, is what Miller calls a ‘meta-symbol’. When used as a ‘meta-
symbol’, Miller argues
Coca-Cola comes to stand, not just for a particular soft-drink, but also
for the problematic nature of commodities in general. . . . It may stand for
commodities or capitalism, but equally Imperialism or Americanization.
. . . So Coca-Cola is not merely material culture, it is a symbol that
stands for a debate about material culture. (1998: 170)
Obviously, a Western brand like Coca-Cola can stand for something like
‘the West’ in different ways. We have already seen examples of empty
Western Coca-Cola bottles circulating as ‘fl oating signifi ers’ in the socialist
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 139
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 139
3/2/2012 3:20:57 PM
3/2/2012 3:20:57 PM
140
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
period. Transferred form the capitalist to the socialist context, bottles
and detached labels of branded (Russian
fi rmennye , Georgian
pirmis )
goods no longer indexed the products of distinct and rivalrous Western
producers, but instead indexed and provided an authentic link directly to
the imaginary West itself. In its stereotypical defi nition in the late socialist
period, ‘something was fi rmennyi because it was manufactured elsewhere
and therefore established an authentic link with the Imaginary West’
(Yurchak 2005: 196). 1 It follows from this that it didn’t much matter what
the brand in question was, any empty container or detached label would
serve this function equally well. But these fl oating signifi ers of brand stood
for the West as metonymic indexes offering authentic links with the West,
unlike the metaphoric deployment of brand in brand totemism.
This leads to another related point. Under socialism, brand in general
was treated as a category stereotypically associated with Western products
(even though there were in fact Soviet brands, these remained the exception
to the basic rule). So, generally, no single Western brand was deployed as a
meta-symbol in ‘totemic’ opposition to socialist production, rather, all of
them were: Western goods stood to socialist goods as brand to brandless.
One ironic consequence of the alignment of ‘brand’ with ‘Western’ and
‘brandless’ with socialist state production was that the socialist state was
often robbed of credit for the high quality goods that it produced under
brand names (Fehervary 2009: 442): Laghidze’s waters are actually a
fairly good example of this tendency, as we have seen above. While the
metaphoric use of Western brands as meta-symbols of the West itself is
a
secondary development based on their primary semiotic function to
locate products in relation to producers and products, in late socialist
consumption the opposite was the case: all Western brands were always
already ‘symbols disconnected from their literal meanings’ (Yurchak 2005:
197). However, while brands as meta-symbols are primarily metaphors,
these otherwise similar deployments of Western brands under socialism
as ‘fl oating signifi ers’ disconnected from the world of products, producers
and consumers, functioned metonymically. Where brands as metasymbols
typically simplify the fi eld of brand oppositions to make one single brand
stand for a whole section of the fi eld (e.g. Coca-Cola stands for ‘the West’),
these brand ‘fl oating signifi ers’ all indifferently provided contact with ‘the
imaginary West’.
Under postsocialism, Western brands ‘became real’, erstwhile empty
Coca-Cola bottles displayed as emblems of the West were now real
containers for real beverages. However, the tendency of Western brand
to become fl oating signifi ers detached from producers and products
under socialism fi nds a strange homology in the postsocialist problem
of falsifi cation. Falsifi ed products, after all, display the same material
separability between the semiotic apparatus of brand (bottle, label) and the
product and producer. However, while this represented a semiotic resource
under socialism (indexing authentic contact with the imaginary West), it
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 140
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 140
3/2/2012 3:21:00 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:00 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
141
becomes a semiotic problem under postsocialism (indexing lack of authentic
contact with the producer, as often as not a Western brand). Falsifi cation
not only represents a rupture of the authentic link between the brand and
the imaginary West, it is often taken to be the sign of either a nefarious
occult agency (the Mafi a), or ethnic others (Turks, compare the Jews and
Armenians upon whom the wholesale falsifi cation of Borjomi is blamed
in the preceding chapter), or more generally that the goods came from the
(equally imaginary) East, specifi cally Turkey (Pelkmans 2006: 171–94).
Just as Europe or ‘the West’ is associated with modernization, prosperity,
civilization, and Turkey (or Asia) is associated with the opposites, so too
Europe is associated with authentic production and high quality goods
and Turkey is associated with falsifi cation and shoddy goods (Pelkmans
2006: 188). This theory locating falsifi cation in the imaginary East is thus
a complementary continuation of the semiotic logic of the imaginary West.
In this revised version of ‘brand totemism’, authentic brands still derive
from the West, but falsifi ed brands derive from the East.
Where empty Western Coca-Cola bottles had circulated as metonymic
indexes of the imaginary West under socialism, now Coca-Cola as a brand
was recruited from among many other Western brands to serve as a metaphor
for the West (see also Manning 2009b for a parallel example involving
cigarette brands). To complete such a metaphoric opposition, some local
socialist product needs to play the corresponding role of ‘socialist brand’.
We have already seen that Laghidze’s waters and Coca-Cola seem fated
to form a permanent totemic pairing of this kind. However, to make this
pairing work iconographically, the two products need to be rendered similar
enough so that their differences can become signifi cant. Another example of
a brand totemism which faces off Laghidze’s waters and Coca-Cola shows
how this works. A Georgian cartoon from the late 1990s summed up the
transition to capitalism by showing an animate bottle of Laghidze’s sitting
on the pavement on a street corner, begging, and a passing animate bottle
of Coca-Cola fl ipping it some small change ( Figure 5.6 ).
Obviously, the cartoon-writer is not merely commenting on the fate of
fi rms like Laghidze’s, but also the fate of socialist production in general
in the postsocialist, capitalist period. Transferred to whole populations,
Laghidze’s stands for the general abjection of the people of the socialist
generation as a whole, or even Georgia’s disastrous transition from socialism
to postsocialism.
This brand totemism reading seems simple enough, but in order to make
this iconography work, the cartoonist has to fi nd a way to treat a vanishing
commodity, Laghidze’s waters, as being a product that is packaged and
branded in the same ways as the easily recognizable Coca-Cola bottle,
including distinctive colour, name, logo and even shape of the bottle. But
to do this, the semiotic distinctiveness of Laghidze’s has to be ‘reverse
engineered’ according to the semiotic logic of Coca-Cola. We have already
seen how the socialist era label of Laghidze emphasizes the raw material
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 141
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 141
3/2/2012 3:21:00 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:00 PM
142
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
over the producer (Figure 5.5), but the differences do not end there. For a
capitalist brand like Coca-Cola, the distinctive ‘trade dress’ (the bottle) is
part of the semiotic technology of brand, but Laghidze’s waters not only
lacks a distinctive type of bottle, but is seldom found in bottled form at all.
For Coca-Cola, the bottle is part of the distinctive technology of brand,
for Laghidze’s the bottle is just a technology of packaging. If Coca-Cola
as a brand is strongly associated with its trade dress, the distinctive bottle,
to treat Laghidze’s as a brand on its own terms, we need instead to attend
to it as a heterogeneous assemblage whose very heterogeneity constitutes,
according to the brand manager above, the very essence of this brand.
From the perspective of the lively animation of the technical assemblage
described above which produces the drink before your very eyes, a bottle of
Coca-Cola is lifeless. But from this perspective, it would be even worse to
try to contain the liveliness of Laghidze’s in a lifeless bottle. Our nostalgic
Georgian brand manager above treats seeing her old friend Laghidze’s in a
bottle as being akin to seeing a dead friend in a coffi n, the name on the label
like an epitaph: ‘Perhaps I will also cry when my friend will no longer be
there, when it appears only in lifeless bottles. Will its name, alone, remind
me of those life-giving, fi zzy waters, which I so loved and made me so
happy in my youth?’ (Ak’opiani 2007: 63).
Not a brand but a name: The Laghidze ideology
What all these postsocialist discourses have in common is that Laghidze’s
is assimilated to the Western discourse of brand, usually in opposition to
a clear example of a Western brand like Coca-Cola. Mitrophane Laghidze
and his successors would have disagreed with this assimilation strenuously.
In fact, in the opinion of Ramaz Laghidze, his son, drinks like Coca-Cola,
made-up products with made-up names, represented the very antithesis of
the ‘Mitrophanic tradition’:
‘In recent times there is as palpable tendency for an excess of drinks
with made up names, we need to resurrect’, he [Ramaz Laghidze] said,
‘the Mitrophanic tradition of preparing natural fruit syrups, which
essentially conditioned the unique properties of these drinks, their
medicinal, dietary and gustatory functions’. (Aslanishvili 1989: 4)
If the semiotic logic of capitalist brand names specifi cally divorces the
product from the brand, then the semiotic logic of socialist product
naming privileged referential ‘transparency’ over such capitalist deceit
and misrepresentation (Fehervary 2009: 438). Accordingly, in Mitrophane
Laghidze’s 1953 work on the manufacture of non-alcoholic beverages,
he elaborates with scientifi c precision a system of objective denotational
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 142
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 142
3/2/2012 3:21:01 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:01 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
143
reference for the domain of non-alcoholic beverages. Of fruit drinks, for
example, there are two types, natural drinks that are based on natural
fruit juices from which they should take their names, and those prepared
artifi cially from synthetic ‘fruit’ essences (Laghidze 1953: 11). Both of these
are separated in turn from an even more artifi cial group, Western drinks
made with artifi cial fl avourings and with correspondingly made-up names:
‘so-called “fantasy drinks” which have made up names’. The problem with
this group is not that they are necessarily artifi cial in their contents, rather
the problem is that given their made-up names, one can never really know
anything at all about their contents, which could be literally anything. He
dwells on the obscurantism of these naming practices at length:
To a separate group of non-alcoholic drinks belongs the so-called
drinks with made-up names, which in some countries they call ‘fi zzy
limonat ’. Very often there is no natural connection between the name
and the content of these drinks whatsoever. The names and numbers of
drinks with made up names are legion and their potential combinations
[between names and contents] practically unlimited. To this group
belong fairly widespread drinks: ‘Cream Soda’, ‘Theatrical’, ‘Spring’,
‘Crème de Vanilla’, ‘Coca-Cola’ and many other drinks which frequently
have strange names. In the mixtures of drinks of made up names it is
possible that mixtures of natural fruit essences and fruit juices will be
used, or endless combinations of synthetic aromatic-fl avor substances.
(Laghidze 1953: 11)
This opposition between the transparency of socialist naming and the
obscurantism of capitalist naming underlines the productivist ‘monism’ of
the socialist product and the capricious dualism of brand and product under
capitalism. For Laghidze, it is clear, products that had the same ingredients
and properties defi ned in technoscientifi c terms should not be distinguished
at all by their descriptors. From a socialist productivist perspective, terms
like Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Fiesta or Sprite, are not transparently descriptive of
the product, and thus serve to illustrate the capricious dualism of product
and brand typical of capitalist branding. 2
The ideology of transparency emphasizes a naturalizing link between
the nature of the product and its name, a linkage which preserved in
socialist product nomenclature and abolished in the capitalist opposition
between the product and the brand. In a precisely similar way, members
of the Laghidze family have always insisted that the name Laghidze itself
is a (last) name ( gvari ), an inalienable attribute of a person, rather than an
alienable attribute like a brand ( pirmi) . The apparent absurdity of capitalist
branding and its uncritical worship by socialist youth could be parodied
precisely by the absurd idea that such youth might well substitute the
alienable non-human category of brand ( pirmi ) for the inalienable, human
category of last name ( gvari ) ( Figure 5.7 ):
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 143
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 143
3/2/2012 3:21:01 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:01 PM
144
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 5.7 ‘I’m getting married!’ ‘What brand is she?’ ( Niangi 1978, 13, Artist Ch.
Deisadze)
The insistence that Laghidze is a ‘name’ and not a ‘brand’ again reiterates
the naturalism of the semiotic ideology of productivism, which sees
production as being an expression of natural forces, including both natural
ingredients (‘Tarragon’) and human producers (‘Laghidze’), which socialist
terminology lays bare and capitalist branding obscures. It also underlines
the way that Laghidze’s waters is based on a typically Soviet conception
of the producer as a human fi gure as a charismatic, embodied, mediator
between the natural and technological forces of production. By contrast,
our contemporary Western ideology of food production is strongly dualistic,
opposing technology to nature, the cooked to the raw, as what Rachel
Laudan calls ‘culinary modernism’ and ‘culinary luddism’ (Laudan 2001,
see also Meneley 2004). From such a dualistic perspective, Mitrophane
Laghidze is an apparently paradoxical fi gure, neither a fi gure of culinary
modernist industrial production nor culinary luddite artisanal production,
though his ‘sorcery’ appears to embody aspects of both. Socialist period
discussions and documentaries never fail to begin by drawing attention to
the way he personally selected his natural raw materials according to what
we might call principles of terroir :
Taking into account the specifi c qualities of local raw materials, he chose
raw materials with exacting care according to locality. For example, he
prepared raspberry syrup with berries found only in Bakuriani, which
were very aromatic and fl avorful, although it would have been cheaper
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 144
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 144
3/2/2012 3:21:01 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:01 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
145
to use produce brought in from the North Caucasus. . . . He really was a
sorcerer [ jadokari ]. (Aslanishvili 1989: 4)
But if he was an artisanal locavore, he was also an industrial modernist
mass-producer: these same discussions and documentaries (as well as
Laghidze’s own discussions of production) also never fail to point to
his ‘exacting maintenance of optimal technological regimes’ and his
commitment to use this ‘plentiful high quality fruit abundantly existing
among us in the mass production of non-alcoholic beverages’ (Aslanishvili
1989: 4). The centrepiece of any representation of his production process,
which moves from nature to technology ( Figure 5.8 ), is mediated by the
sorcerer himself at the moment of degustation (repeating the stages of
the same organoleptic process used in wine-tasting) in which Laghidze’s
secret, the ‘tip of his tongue’, mediates between these opposed moments
( Figure 5.9 ).
For Laghidze’s productivist monism, however, there seems to have
been no contradiction between simultaneously endorsing a strongly
technoscientifi c and strongly naturalistic or artisanal attitude towards food
production. Naturalist ontologies, after all, as we have seen, can involve a
strong nature/culture dualism of the sort that characterizes the opposition
between culinary luddism and culinary modernism, but it can also involve
a monism, in which both the terms opposed in the dualism are assimilated
to the encompassing term of nature (Descola 1996, Viveiros de Castro
Figure 5.8 Synopsis of a typical 1940s Laghidze newsreel: Nature, sorcerer,
technology
Figure 5.9 Detailed view of Mitrophane Laghidze moving through the different
stages of degustation: Visual, olfactory, gustatory (cf. Silverstein 2003: 223 for wine)
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 145
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 145
3/2/2012 3:21:02 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:02 PM
146
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
2004). Thus, Laghidze himself seems to have seen his own technoscientifi c
intervention in production, his ‘sorcery’, as nothing more than allowing the
fl avours of nature to speak for themselves. When asked how he managed
to make such delicious drinks, Mitrophane Laghidze answered ‘I don’t add
anything to these fragrant fruits, which our varied nature has given us in
such abundance’ (Sigua 1980: 14).
Laghidze’s apparently paradoxical semiotic ideology can be viewed as
a socialist species of a wider characteristically modern monist ideology
of productivism, ‘the belief that human society and nature are linked by
the primacy and identity of all productive activity, whether of laborers, of
machines, or of natural forces’ (Rabinbach 1990: 3). Such a productivist
ideology, which is particularly, though not exclusively, characteristic of
socialism, does not set nature and industry in opposition to each other, but
sets both in opposition to the manifest artifi ciality of the market (hence
Laghidze’s opposition to using the semiotics of brand as part of product
nomenclature above).
The ontological key to the puzzle has to do with the ambiguous way that
the category of labour animates production. One of the ambiguities of the
Marxian understanding of labour is whether, as stressed by Rabinbach it
is a ‘quintessentially human creative activity defi ning social being’, a view
favoured in Western (Hegelian) Marxism, or whether it is a biophysical
or energeticist conception of labour, favoured in Eastern (scientifi c)
Marxism (Rabinbach 1990: 72–4). Western Marxist models of labour
as an exclusively human attribute set human labour in opposition to two
sets of non-humans, both its object, nature, and its potential usurpers,
machine technology. Therefore, this humanistic social defi nition of labour
fi nds its exemplary exponent in artisanal craft labour, leading to dualistic
oppositions between artisanal and industrial labour, culinary luddism and
culinary modernism. By contrast, Eastern Marxist energeticist conceptions
of labour are typically monist, encompassing the productive activities of
both humans and non-humans, natural and technological actors, animating
the entire universe with this property.
On the face of it, Laghidze’s description of his involvement in the
production process as ‘letting nature speak for itself’ and the socialist
mythology elevating his human involvement in production to a quasi-
supernatural secret of sorcery would appear to present a paradox. The
former would appear to illustrate a naturalizing energeticist model of
labour, the latter a supernaturalization of the humanist model of artisanal
labour. However, Laghidze seems to see his use of human art and non-
human technology not in opposition to nature, but as an extension of it,
as being simply a means of conveying the natural fl avours of the carefully
chosen fruit to the consumer: his ‘sorcery’ is simply in the way that he can
mediate transparently between the different productive forces, both human
and non-human, over which he presides. In the same way, his ideology of
referential transparency does not hide the natural ingredients which are the
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 146
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 146
3/2/2012 3:21:04 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:04 PM
COLAS AND UNCOLAS
147
essence of his product under a prosthetic artifi cial identity of a ‘made-up’
brand name, any more than he would hide his crucial involvement as a
producer. After all, Laghidze embodied his secret of production in his
person and in his name alike. It is therefore no surprise that Laghidze’s
soft drinks remained a dynasty even under socialism, for the secret of
Laghidze’s seemed to be embodied in the family name, and the technical
management of production (not ownership) in the factory always remained
within the kinship group. The family dynasty was a technical intelligentsia
dynasty of producers, not of owners. Tornike Laghidze, Mitrophane’s
grandson, explaining why he would not adulterate his soft drinks to meet
the demands of the capitalist market, needs no greater argument than ‘This
is Laghidze!’
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 147
9781441160188_Ch05_Final_txt_print.indd 147
3/2/2012 3:21:04 PM
3/2/2012 3:21:04 PM
CHAPTER SIX
Wine
At the table everyone ate what he pleased and as he pleased,
but God forbid he should cheat and omit the required glass. That
the Leader did not like. The democracy of food at his table was
balanced by the despotism of drink.
– Fazil Iskander, Belshazzar’s Feasts , from the novel
Sandro of Chegem (1983: 178)
If a foreigner knows two things about the country of Georgia, it is that
Georgia is the homeland of Stalin (‘the Leader’ in the above quote) and,
Georgians claim, the homeland of wine, which Georgians drink in
large quantities at a kind of ritual feast called a supra. A curious pair of
achievements, it would seem that no two things could be further apart, on
the one hand, a ruthless and paranoid dictator, on the other, an alcoholic
drink whose ritual consumption at the supra expresses a happy-go-lucky,
somewhat drunken, convivial expression of love and friendship. And
yet, as the quote above shows, Georgians continuously draw attention to
parallelisms between the political order of the state and the convivial order
of the table: according to a Georgian proverb, the toastmaster ( tamada )
who leads the feast ( supra ) is ‘the dictator of the table’.
The quote above comes from one of Fazil Iskander’s novels about a
mythical Abkhazian extraordinary everyman, Sandro of Chegem (Abhazia
borders on Georgia, and whatever their political and cultural differences,
Abhazia and Georgia are essentially the same in the centrality of the
ritual of the supra). In these novels, Uncle Sandro’s legendary abilities
as a tamada at the table are frequently compared to Stalin’s abilities as
‘the Leader’ of the Soviet Union. The narrator of the novel calls ‘Uncle
Sandro “the greatest toastmaster [ tamada ] of all times and nations”, which
parodies Stalin’s ornate titles “the father of all nations” and “the greatest
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 148
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 148
2/21/2001 11:33:03 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:03 AM
WINE
149
leader of all time”’ (Kanevskaya 2004: 145). Uncle Sandro himself, whose
semi-fabulous personal adventures involve many run-ins with the famous
Georgian dictator, opines that
Stalin too might have become a pretty fair tamada had he not been so
busy with politics. Here Uncle Sandro stopped and looked slyly around
from his high pillow, as if trying to see whether his far-reaching innuendo
had reached his listeners. Whether it had or not is hard to say because
at that point Tengiz tore himself away from his bone and gave Uncle
Sandro a scornful look, asking ‘So, if you hadn’t spent so much time at
the table you might have become a great leader?’ (Iskander 1983: 273)
If the metaphoric comparison of dictatorships and feasts is so good to think
for Georgians and Abkhazians alike, how much more food for thought is
there if the legendary dictator is actually a guest at such a feast? This is the
conceit that Iskander uses to explore the role of the paranoid personality
and emerging personality cult of Stalin, by imagining him as a guest at an
Abkhazian feast on the eve of the Great Purges (see also Kanevskaya 2004,
esp. 137–45). This story (also made into a fi lm in 1989) plays with the
opposition between the dictatorship over everyday life in the Soviet Union
that Stalin has as secretary of the Communist Party, and the dictatorship
over everyday life at the table that the tamada (Nestor Lakoba, the head
of the Abkazian communist party) has at this feast. At the feast, Stalin is
presented as someone who takes joy in escaping the world of the state, of
politics, and fi nding in small things, the world of everyday life, a world
unpolluted by politics, for examples, the troop of dancers (Uncle Sandro is
one of them) who provide entertainment at the feast:
[Stalin] was gladdened by the sight of these well-built dancers, tightly
buttoned in their black cherkeskas. At moments like this, he loved
anything whose value was both obvious and irrelevant to politics,
which sometimes worried him. Seemingly irrelevant, that is, because
subliminally he associated this obvious value and perfection with the
cumbersome, crawly thing that metamorphosed from his every political
act, and he interpreted it as a material, if small, proof of the thing’s
innocence. Thus the twenty well-built dancers metamorphosed into
fl ourishing delegates for his ethnic policy, just as the children who ran
into the Mausoleum where he stood on holidays metamorphosed into
the heralds of the future, its rosy kisses. (Iskander 1983: 177)
This novel refl ects a more widespread tendency in the metadiscourse of
the supra , which is characterized by a kind of disemia, a ‘tension between
offi cial self-representation and what goes on in the privacy of collective
introspection’ (Herzfeld 1997: 14). On the one hand, according to a kind of
offi cial self-representation, the supra can stand as a domain of ‘antipolitics’,
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 149
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 149
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
150
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
the innocent world of everyday life that is the very opposite of the dystopian
world of totalitarianism, and even an antidote to it: Uncle Sandro notes
that Stalin would have made a good tamada , but misses the tragic irony
that ‘if Stalin had spent more time in simple human pleasures and used
his organizational genius as a tamada , the world would have been a much
better place’ (Kanevskaya 2004: 145). On the other hand, in more intimate
self-refl ections, the institution of tamada , the ‘dictator of the table’, is
far from being an innocent refuge from the totalitarian state, but is often
treated as the very image of totalitarianism and assorted other evils of the
Georgian political condition (such as certain forms of ‘grey’ corruption
indirectly mediated by the social networks celebrated in the supra).
The supra, then, provides a disemic image both of the innocent world of
Georgian everyday life, but also for the dystopian world of Georgian politics,
and even how the apparently innocent world of everyday life (the supra )
can help produce the dystopian aspects of Georgian public life (endemic
corruption, for example). But the supra itself contains within it a political
ordering of its own. As the quote above indicates, the supra itself is not only
divided politically between moments of democracy and dictatorship, but
these moments are allocated to different material moments of the supra,
which could indeed be aptly described as a ‘democracy of food balanced
by a despotism of drink’. Moving from its most material manifestation to
its most ideal, the supra is a feast, ideally characterized by an extremely
abundant display of food, whose consumption is indeed relatively unordered.
At the same time, the supra is an occasion for ritualized drinking, involving
the consumption of large quantities of wine (an average of one or more
litres per participant). Lastly, the drinking of wine at the supra is attended
by ritual toasts, directed by the tamada , in such a way that the ability to
consume large quantities of alcohol while speaking eloquently are brought
into alignment as part of a general ritual ordering, a ‘dictatorship of drink’.
As we move from the material supra of food to the ideal supra of words, we
move at the same time from the foodstuffs purchased, prepared and served
by the largely invisible labour of the women of the household, to the wine
which will be consumed in highly visible masculine labours of toasting
(including, of course a toast to the women of the household in repayment
for their labours).
This asymmetry between visible masculine symbolic labour (drinking
and toasting) and invisible feminine material labour (preparing the food)
makes the semiotic divisions of the supra resemble activities of dissident
‘antipolitics’ elsewhere in late socialist space. There, male dissident
intelligentsia political activities were carried out in private domestic spaces,
often as not, in the most intimate feminine interior domain of the household,
the kitchen. In this interior domain, the private work of women invisibly
produces the material infrastructure for the political work of men (Gal
2002: 89). Thus if the supra is highly regulated ritual order, a dictatorship
of drink, which is an image of the totalitarian state, it could also stand for
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 150
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 150
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
WINE
151
a kind of antipolitics, either in the sense of a dissident ‘kitchen politics’ or in
the sense of a domain of moral life entirely innocent of the alienated world
of politics, a compensatory private locus of expression of religious values,
of civic values, of personal freedoms, of Georgianness, which had been
denied expression under socialism. As a result of this disemic tendency of
the supra, the supra has become after the end of socialism a contentious
political battleground between different groups of Georgian elites, each
emphasizing different ‘political’ dimensions of the supra.
What is it about the supra that makes it ‘good to think’? The supra
is as ubiquitous a social form as it is obligatory. The supra is the single
mould into which are poured all secular rituals, all social occasions, formal
and informal, celebrations of all holidays from New Years to Christmas
and all life cycle transitions from birth to death. The ubiquity of the supra
more than anything explains why the supra is good to think as an image
of Georgian society: the supra is good to think (and challenge, change or
preserve) as an image of society, because it is seemingly coterminous with
Georgian society. Georgian social life presents itself as an endless series of
supras.
The supra, as the hegemonic ritual form of alcoholic consumption in
Georgia, organizes all other forms of drinking into a fi eld of different
practices, unifi ed only by the fact that they are not supras. A good example
is provided by practices of beer drinking. In Tbilisi, the capital of the land
of the vine, beer gardens and cafes proliferate, but one searches in vain for
wine by the glass except in for restaurants that cater to foreigners. This is
because wine is a ritual drink, while beer is an informal, non-ritual drink.
(As we will see in the chapter on vodka, there are places in the mountains
of Georgia where beer is the ritual drink.) According to a self-consciously
urban custom, one may toast with beer, but a beer toast is always humorous
and always insincere, and almost always political. What is meant by a toast
with beer is always the opposite of what is said. Wine toasts are always
treated as being serious, sincere, and are never political. ‘Here’s to President
Shevardnadze’, ‘Here’s to President Saakashvili’, drunk with beer, means
‘Down with President Shevardnadze!’, ‘Down with President Saakashvili!’
But the humour of this ritual inversion never lasts long. Seldom is more
than a single ‘anti-toast’ drunk at such an ‘anti-supra’.
In addition to its ubiquity and hegemony, the formal organization of
the supra itself as a ritual makes it extremely visible, memorable and easy
to describe. The ritual order of the supra has all the formal properties that
oppose ritual performances to everyday life, such as conventionality, rigidity,
condensation, repetition, redundancy and boundedness (Tambiah 1979).
All of these can be gathered together under the rubric of entextualization ,
in that they are processes that produce a strong opposition between a
well-delineated, bounded, and therefore visible text or performance and
its context (Bauman 2004). Processes that break down these boundaries
between the text/performance and the context, proliferating indexical
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 151
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 151
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
152
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
linkages between text/performance and context, and making the text/
performance less portable across contexts, are collected under the rubric
of contextualization .
In content too, supras are like most rituals in that they are exemplary
moments where the normative categories of that inform everyday life are
given expression in ritual performance. Because it is a traditionalizing
and yet very visible aspect of the social, it presents itself as an ideal and
idealized model of the social world. As a result, those who seek to preserve
or change Georgian society are drawn to the supra which is its normative
idealized image. Like any sacred image, it attracts idolaters and iconoclasts
alike. The way that these external discourses about the supra mobilize the
supra as an image of Georgian society and politics are in part a product of
the way the internal discourse of the supra produces a ritual image of the
relation of society to politics.
The moral and material supra
Since the Renaissance, it has been a commonplace that feasts have
mediated the opposed spheres of cosmology and social life, uniting talk
and consumption, the moral and material, the spiritual and carnival,
and the individual and the social (Jeanneret 1991: 38, Valeri 2001: 10).
Feasts are multidimensional performances, including matters of talk and
comportment, drinking, and eating. However, not all of these features are
accorded equal attention or importance at the same time. The aspects of
the supra that are salient for Georgian men may be of little interest to
Georgian women. Those that are salient for Georgians may pass unnoticed
by foreigners. And of course, different genres of representation may produce
very different images of the supra, both because they are located in different
ideological milieus (cartoons deriving from the state run satirical journal
Niangi , for example, produce views very different from those produced by
etiquette manuals), but also because of their form: visual representations
like cartoons, in particular, draw attention to the visible, material aspects
of the supra, while etiquette manuals draw attention instead to the proper
ordering of toasts, and so on. On this level as well, like other feasts, the
supra presents itself in a disemic manner, where offi cial self-presentations
focus on the idealized moral order of the supra as a reality sui generis,
intimate discourses of self-refl ection instead focus on all those elements not
given recognition in this account, particularly when the materiality of the
supra overfl ows the semiotic boundaries of the moral order.
A similar opposition between the ‘moral’ and ‘material’ orders of
the supra runs through everyday metadiscourse as well, captured in the
opposition between the ‘cultured supra’ ( k’ult’uruli supra ) and the ‘orgy’
( ghreoba ). When I had been invited to a funeral wake, a friend of mine
opined that it would therefore be ‘cultured’ supra, defi ned by quantitative
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 152
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 152
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
WINE
153
restraint, restraint on drinking in particular, the minimum number of
toasts being drunk, people getting up and leaving on a timely basis, so
that it ‘does not become a drunken orgy’ ( ghreoba ). While the practice of
a ‘cultured supra’ is generally an index of the moral quality of the persons
involved (‘cultured people’), as he cannily noted, a ‘cultured supra’ could
emerge as a result of a quantitative absence of resources (food and drink),
in effect enforced by the simple material inability to bring the supra to the
level of ‘drunken orgy’. The opposition here is both an external relation,
recognizing different genres of supra based on the relative salience of moral
and material factors, but also an internal relation: any cultured supra, if it
goes on long enough, can degenerate into a drunken orgy.
Food: The feminine infrastructure of
masculine sociability
Let’s begin with the food. In most academic and indigenous descriptions
of the supra, the supra is represented as if it consisted essentially of talking
and drinking, the quintessentially male activities of the supra, just as
female activities are relegated to the relatively uninteresting role of the
presupposed but backgrounded infrastructure (Nizharadze 2000: 22). And
yet the supra depends, more than anything else, on the almost theatrical
display and presentation of foodstuffs, a matter assiduously attended to
by an exclusively female staff, women often mobilizing large networks to
provide food for a single feast (Mars and Altman 1991: 275–6).
Not only must the quantity and variety of food produce an image of
excess, so that each guest may eat as much as they like of whatever they
like, it should always appear in a state of perfection, every serving dish
should always be full, every plate should always be clean. Yet, the very
act of consumption destroys this state of perfection. The intersection of
these imperatives of display and consumption generates a vast amount of
bustling work for the female staff, who hover over the table, replacing the
plates of guests with fresh ones, ensuring all dishes are always as full as
if they had never been touched, or, at least, spreading the existing food
more evenly across the dish. Like any infrastructure (Star 1999, Elyachar
2010), the food is presupposed, present but seldom commented upon, and
its consumption, unlike wine, is unrecognized and unregulated in ritual
terms (at least by men, just as the tamada orders his guests to drink, the
hostess will sometimes enjoin a guest to eat more).
A supra is a democracy of food: the guests must be allowed to eat
whatever they may want, whenever they want it. But this democracy of
food is subtended by a vast amount of female labour which is seldom
recognized and repaid by the men by more than a single toast. This
immense asymmetry is parodied in a Soviet period cartoon (Figure 6.1),
where a woman is shown in three frames assembling a meal (including
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 153
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 153
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
154
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.1 Untitled ( Niangi 1982, 5, Artist M. Abashidze)
going shopping, returning with heavy bags, and cooking) as her husband
sits idly by, fi nally taking up the glass to perform the focal moment of
making an 8th of March (International Women’s Day) toast in her honour.
Aside from using the occasion of the 8th of March to critique the ‘double
shift’ worked by women under socialism, the accent is on the very unequal
exchange between the largely unsung
material labours of the woman
(which, after all, take up three frames of shopping, carrying and cooking)
and the ritually focal moral labour of proposing and drinking performed
by the man.
The supra ritual has very little to say about the food which it presupposes,
but the supra cannot succeed as an act of hospitality without it. In a
paradigmatic supra the table must display an inexhaustible abundance of
traditional dishes, so much so that the tablecloth ( supra ) from which the
ritual takes its name should be almost invisible, and indeed, new dishes are
often simply stacked at the interstices of existing ones. The result can be
‘three-to-four storey supras’ with food piled so high that only with diffi culty
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 154
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 154
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:04 AM
WINE
155
Figure 6.2 ‘Move aside these plates and suckling pigs so the guests can see me!’
( Niangi 1979, 9, Artist G. Pirtskhalava)
can the toasters clink each others’ glasses. In another Soviet period cartoon
(Figure 6.2), the tamada is saying ‘Remove these plates and suckling pigs so
the guest can see me!’ The homily explains that ‘Frequently we greet guests
with “three-to-four-storey” supras, but with this we cannot merit the name
of generous host, for at such times we convert human relationships into a
competition in pigging out.’ In a properly ordered supra, the homily seems
to say, the material display of generosity in the form of food should remain
fi rmly subordinated to the expression of cultured ‘human relationships’.
But it is precisely the semiotic subordination of the material order (food)
as presupposed ‘infrastructure’ to the moral order (toasts) that allows food
to perform other semiotic work invisibly on the indexical plane. Any ritual
has a conventionalized performative dimension that is constant for all
instances of it (all weddings are effective, performative, in that they marry
people, for example, regardless of whether they take place in Las Vegas or
not). However, the variation in the material elaboration of a ritual produces
a set of indexical features that are also performative in that they enact
various interpersonal differences of status, wealth, friendship, and the like
(Tambiah 1985: 157–61). Thus, lavish material expenditures in the supra
index the status and wealth of the hosts, and such rituals, whatever their
other ostensible explicit meanings, also are latently competitive displays
(Mars and Altman 1991: 275–6). Satires of the supra recognize that the
quantity and quality of the food present, as well as its disposition at the
table, will index the presence of guests who must be impressed, such as
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 155
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 155
2/21/2001 11:33:06 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:06 AM
156
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.3 Bootlicker’s New Year’s supra
‘The Director is coming, the Director! Add two more roast turkeys to the end of
the table!’
( Niangi 1959, 24, Artist E. Berdzenishvili)
when one’s boss comes to dinner ( Figure 6.3 ). The performative effect of
the materiality of food is not explicitly recognized in the ritual order of the
supra (where all guests are equal), but this very invisibility allows it to work
more effectively in its covert role of persuasion (by covertly recognizing
some guests as being more equal than others).
However, in a social order dominated by scarcity such as the socialist
one, food is not merely an expression of wealth, it is a general form of
wealth. The indexical (persuasive) effect of the material expenditure of
the supra therefore oscillates between the moral economy of the gift and
the material economy of the bribe. There is a Russian joke I can half-
remember about Georgians from the early postsocialist period. It goes
something like this: A Georgian man applies for position in a fi rm where
a Russian man is the director. The Russian director asks the Georgian
man what his qualifi cations are. The Georgian replies proudly: ‘I have
degrees in seven fi elds!’ The Russian, astonished, since this is obviously
impossible, asks: ‘How big a bribe did you pay for those?’ The Georgian,
angered at the suggestion of nefarious dealings, replies: ‘I paid no bribes,
they were gifts!’
The joke revolves around very different Russian and Georgian conceptions
of precisely where the boundary between the ‘gift’ and the ‘bribe’ should
be drawn (see Ledeneva 1998 for the Russian case). Clearly, the opposition
between ‘gift’ and ‘bribe’ becomes particularly unclear when the gift
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 156
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 156
2/21/2001 11:33:07 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:07 AM
WINE
157
or bribe is composed of food and drink (rather than money), and even
more so when both parties of the exchange consume this food and drink
together (thereby affi rming durable social relations absent from bribery
exchanges). Even so, Georgians have long explicitly recognized that some
forms of the supra are in effect akin to bribery, the most famous of these is
probably the desert’acia (a playful blend of desert’i ‘dessert’, and disert’acia
‘dissertation’), the massive supra that must be thrown for all and sundry
after one defends one’s disert’acia (dissertation): many people must actually
delay their disert’acia until they have funds for their desert’acia . The reverse
could also happen, if for example, if one failed one’s dissertation, then one
might have a huge quantity of food that would also be lost ( Figure 6.4 ):
We could tell a relatively simple story about why food takes on these
functions in a socialist economy of scarcity. The prototypical, most
general, form of wealth under capitalism is money, but socialist money, in
an economy of scarcity (where there is more money than available goods
in circulation), could achieve certain goals, but it frequently needed some
human help to do so. In Russia, monetary exchange was largely helped
along by informal social networking practices called blat (Ledeneva 1998).
Hence the Russian socialist period adage: ‘Do not have 100 rubles, have 100
friends’ (Ledeneva 1998: 197). In an economy of scarcity, the most general
Figure 6.4 ‘ Mrs. Ripshdze, what you want with all these refrigerators that you
have borrowed?’
‘My husband failed his dissertation defense and we will also lose the feast prepared
for 300 people.’
( Niangi 1960, 5, Artist Z. Lezhava)
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 157
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 157
2/21/2001 11:33:08 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:08 AM
158
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
form that wealth takes are highly generalized use values, specifi cally those
most essential to everyday life, food and drink. Importantly, many of these
food items were extremely scarce in Russia, and were often acquired through
blat , but in Georgia they were relatively abundant. Under postsocialism
in Russia and Georgia, ‘money became real’ (Ledeneva 1998: 178), and
there was a general decrease in informal networking practices mediated
by commensality and convivial drinking and a relative increase in outright
monetized bribery (Ledeneva 1998: chapter 6). Under such conditions, the
bribe and the gift are expressed in diametrically opposed forms, money and
food/drink, respectively, but under socialism food might in fact be used to
mediate both bribe-like and gift-like exchanges, depending on how it is
deployed.
The indexical performativity of food and drink is largely latent when
embedded within the commensal order of the supra. In order to make
explicit the indexical value of food as a form of ‘bribe wealth’, the
commensal context of consumption must be removed from the picture. In
another late socialist cartoon (Figure 6.5), this particular deployment of
food and drink as a bribe expressed in use-values is typifi ed by a clever
Georgian pun, which presents the gifts of food and drink as the general
means to various ends of social life under socialism that must be ‘arranged’
(through informal social networks or bribery). The Georgian word meaning
‘arrange’ is chats’q’oba , which can mean both ‘arranging’ one’s luggage
and ‘arranging’ ones affairs by informal or corrupt means. According to
most glosses by my Georgian friends and colleagues, the Georgian man in
this cartoon is almost certainly ‘arranging’ his luggage for a trip to Russia,
where he will ‘arrange’ his affairs using the food and drink he is carrying
Figure 6.5 ‘Arranging things’ ( Niangi 1982, 11, Artist J. Lolua)
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 158
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 158
2/21/2001 11:33:09 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:09 AM
WINE
159
with him as bribes. I had initially thought that this food and drink would
be expended in a supra, but Georgian interpreters indicated otherwise: the
food and drink in his luggage simply represents a form of wealth relatively
easy to obtain in Georgia, and diffi cult to obtain in Russia. These are some
of the very goods that Russians could only acquire by informal practices
of blat , so it is fi tting that they are the means of Georgian practices of
‘arranging things’ when abroad in Russia. By all accounts, it was a relatively
common practice for Georgians to carry food and wine in their luggage on
trips to Russia, which, as a portable and general form of wealth, would
allow them to arrange any number of desired outcomes when they arrived,
much like money.
Drink: Masculinity
If food is the province of women, then wine (from production to
consumption) is the province of men (Mars and Altman 1991: 275). The
European writer Alexandre Dumas, in his early description of a Georgian
supra, deemed food to be a ‘very minor consideration’ at a supra when
compared to the quantity of drinking, ‘The important thing is how much
one can drink. Even the most moderate drinkers usually manage fi ve or six
bottles of wine, and the average is twelve or fi fteen’ (Dumas 1962 [1853]:
189). The Georgian ideal of masculinity in the supra ritual is expressed
quantitatively, both in terms of body size and drinking capacity of the
drinker and size and capacity of drinking instruments. Drinking at a supra
is in a very real sense a ‘trial’ in which one’s capacity to drink and speak
are put to the test and which defi nes one’s masculinity. Correspondingly,
the classic image of normative masculinity in cartoons about supras plays
on the often very unequal capacities for drink of those brought together at
a supra.
The implacable ‘logic’ of the supra (where all arguments are mobilized for
the single goal of enforcing drinking) is parodied in another socialist period
cartoon (Figure 6.6): The immense man on the left (a parodic idealization
of quantifi ed masculinity) is prevailing on the smaller man to drink from a
large drinking horn ( q’ants’i ). The smaller man protests with dismay that
‘even dumb animals have a sense of moderation’. The larger man parries
this seeming good sense with the unassailable logic of the supra: ‘Then we
must drink more, so that we can be distinguished from animals!’
Dumas omits any reference to the toasting that justifi es this excessive
drinking. However, in contemporary supras, masculinity at a supra is
expressed quantitatively in equal and paired measures of word and drink.
One must underline the seriousness of one’s well-chosen words with
heroic deeds, specifi cally of drinking. The more one drinks, the more one
‘means’ what one is saying; but at the same time, eloquence and capacity
for drink are both expressions of masculine self-mastery. The amount
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 159
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 159
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
160
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.6 ‘Logic’
‘Drink from this q’ants’i [Drinking horn] it will do you good.’
‘I can’t, even dumb animals have a sense of proportion!’
‘For precisely this reason we must drink more, so that we can be distinguished
from animals.’
( Niangi 1940, 9, Artist M. Lebeshev)
one drinks to the toast indicates amount of respect towards the object of
the toast, while the size of the glass one is offered for the toast indicates
the importance of the toast. The quantity one drinks indicates how one
values the object of the toast. It is not uncommon, for example, for a host
to pick up the half-full glass of a guest after a toast in their own honour
and ask ruefully ‘This is how much you esteem me?’ ( ai ase mapaseb? ).
The two acts, drinking and speaking, are linked by their mutual
resemblance. A recent guide to supra etiquette begins with this
observation:
A Georgian toast should resemble a moderate sized drinking-bowl
( piala ) fi lled with good wine – neither with long words should you tire
your listener, nor should you drink like a drunk, alone, without words.
(Kinkladze 2003: 3)
At the same time the mutual quantitative and qualitative resemblance of
drinking and speaking are underlined by their refl exive relation of indexical
contiguity; at a supra one may never drink without fi rst completing a toast,
which ‘blesses’ the wine. The form of the toast almost always refl exively
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 160
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 160
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
WINE
161
draws attention to the co-presence of drink: ‘With this little glass, I want
to drink a toast to. . . .’ One does not sip, one fi nishes one’s toast and
then (ideally) fi nishes one’s drink ‘to the bottom’, then places the cup on
the table. If the drinking vessel is one that has been so devised so as to be
unable to stand up unaided, as, for example, a q’ants’i (drinking horn)
shown above or (my favourite) wooden goblets made especially without
bases, the tablecloth will be besmirched by the red wine from unfi nished
toast. Therefore, when drinking from such a vessel one must drink to the
bottom.
Not only does the supra calibrate the relationship of drinking to
speaking in quantity, but it also foregrounds the qualitative manner of
drinking. This is expressed by a proliferation in the realm of the technology
of drinking that borders on a poeticization of the otherwise functional
domain of drinking vessels. As Dumas notes:
They have a bewildering variety of drinking vessels of all shapes and
sizes, even the smallest holds at least a bottleful – gourds, silver-mounted
drinking horns two or three feet long, bowls with the head of a stag
painted inside them in such a way that the antlers seem to move as one
drinks. (1962 [1853]: 189)
Drinking with such a special drinking vessel, which for the duration of
a single toast replaces the standard unmarked glass, is called drinking
‘different’ ( gansxvavebuli ). But qualitative difference is also quantitative,
‘different’ drinking vessels almost always at least seem to involve drinking
more, if not absolutely, at least dramaturgically. Such a poeticization and
proliferation of the means of consumption is a frequent motif of socialist
period cartoons about the supra, such as the one reproduced in Figure 6.7 ,
in which the standard toast of the form ‘Friends! With this little glass . . .’
is replaced with, ‘Friends! With these different ( gansxvavebuli ) drinking
vessels.’
‘Different’ drinking vessels are not only ‘different’ in form and aesthetic
design, but also in size and capacity. Thus, with the poeticization of
the drinking performance comes the possibility of
theatricalization of
the drinking performance, dividing the performance in two, between
appearance and reality, front stage and back stage. As one crafty Georgian
acquaintance pointed out to me, ‘different’ drinking vessels differ from a
normal wine glass not only in having a much greater apparent volume, but
also almost all ‘different’ drinking implements are (unlike the usual wine
glasses) all made of opaque materials and also all appear to hold greater
volumes than they actually do hold. Only the pourer and the drinker
really know how much wine is in the drinking horn, and there arises a
possibility for deception and subterfuge. This is important, because usually
drinking ‘different’ vessels to the bottom is not only a semiotic expression
of masculinity, but they also act materially: if they are full, they will get
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 161
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 161
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
162
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.7 ‘Friends! With these different drinking vessels . . .’ ( Niangi 1983 no. 1,
Artist V. Bedoshvili)
you very drunk. ‘Different’ drinking vessels are the primary technology
of ‘forced drinking’ ( ghvinis dadzaleba ), the tamada ’s primary means of
regulation of drinking, enforcing drunkenness on those present (on which
see below). But they are also, in the right hands, a means of producing an
image of manly drinking in its factual absence.
The toasts: Mapping social networks
The central ritual element of the supra is the toasting. The order of toasts
produces a reduced model of society, a ritual microcosm of social macrocosm.
Like any map, the toasts not only produce a miniature diagrammatic icon
of a whole, but also have an indexical component, a ‘you are here’ that
links the individual participants to this map of their social networks. In
general, the toasts of the contemporary urban supra recognize only certain
kinds of private social relationships, centring on relations of kinship and
friendship. Offi cial supras, by contrast, use toasting to create diagrams
of institutional hierarchies, recognizing public categories of relationality
of a specifi c institutional whole (an imperial hierarchy, a state hierarchy,
an institutional hierarchy). In each kind of supra, oppositions between
different spheres (public, private) of modern socialist and postsocialist life
are erected, delineated and reinforced by recognition in toasting. The supra,
functioning as a ritual in both ‘private’ and ‘public’ contexts, serves in each
to delineate a diagram of a universe of social relations, ‘a social network
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 162
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 162
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:10 AM
WINE
163
made manifest’ in Mars and Altman felicitously put it in their classic article
on the supra (Mars and Altman 1991: 277). The ritual thereby serves a
crucial role in bounding off the domains of everyday life and the state (as a
whole or in its separate institutional guises), precisely by ritually delineating
them and objectifying them as entities.
Here again, the supra is a disemic discourse. The offi cial ritual order
explicitly produces an image of an innocent world of everyday life as a
moral order dominated by personal relations of kinship and friendship
opposed to the impersonal state, but at the same time implicitly makes
manifest the very categories of others (kin, friends, acquaintances) who
are thereby obliged to help one colonize the impersonal world of state
bureaucracy with personal relationships. As Mars and Altman (1983,
1991) famously argued, the supra plays a crucial role in making ritually
manifest informal personal support networks under socialism, largely
functional replacing the similar informal practices based on social
networks associated with the Russian category of blat (on these see
Ledeneva 1998): ‘It is through the personalizing institution of the feast
and the networks it represents that the demands of an ego-focused and
competitive culture are able to co-exist alongside an impersonal “meta
bureaucracy”’ (Mars and Altman 1991: 278).
Crucially, as with the practices of blat in Russia, these informal networks
are most effective when their logic is hidden or misrecognized (Ledeneva
1998: 6, Mars and Altman 1991: 276). As with the indexical performativity
of food, this indexical dimension of the supra is latent within the disemia
of the supra, it is given no offi cial recognition in the toasts. Socialist satires
often worked by inverting this disemia, bringing these implicit indexical
meanings latent within the ritual order into sharp focus. In an early Soviet
era cartoon, titled ‘toast’ ( Figure 6.8 ), the explicit text of the toast (certainly a
toast that could never be uttered) is precisely the implicit subtext of toasting
at supras in general. The speaker in the cartoon is stating overtly the covert
political goals of personal advancement he hopes to achieve through private
networking and ‘wily management’ (corruption) by throwing this feast, as
part of a toast to the ‘power of feasting’.
In Russia, the informal everyday practices of networking that allowed
soviets to personalize the formal domain of the state to solve problems
of scarcity ( blat ) were matched by parallel informal practices mediated by
specialist ‘fi xers’ ( tolkachi ) who performed similar functions of acquiring
scarce raw materials or overcoming bureaucratic obstacles that allowed
Soviet fi rms to actually meet their production targets. As Mars and Altman
note, both these categories (
blat ,
tolkachi ) characteristic of Russian
socialism were absent from Georgian socialism, and they suggest that the
networks forged in the supra replaced both these Russian practices (Mars
and Altman 1983: 557). However, in both cases, informal practices based
on social networks, however constituted, were necessary to both everyday
private consumption and state public production in an economy affl icted by
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 163
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 163
2/21/2001 11:33:11 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:11 AM
164
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.8 Toast
‘Comrades! Don’t think that I arranged this feast for you because I want the party
candidacy! They ejected me from the Komkavshiri [Young Communist League,
Konsomol ], but I would not be Assistant to the Director of Surami Collective
School Mikadze, if I did not fuck their mothers! This toast is to the good ole boy
network ( dzma-bichobas ), wily management ( mokherkherbas ), and the power of
feasting.’
( Niangi 1933, no. 10, No Artist Attribution)
scarcity (Ledeneva 1998: 85–6). Far from being a purely wasteful form of
unproductive consumption or a form of corruption inimical to the state (as
state satires often intimated), institutions like the supra actually produced
the informal means that enabled state production. To this extent then, like
the sociable work of blat and ‘fi xers’, the ‘phatic labor’ of the supra toasting
is actually ‘productive labor’ in that it produces part of the infrastructure
of socialist production. As Elyachar notes more generally, such ‘“phatic
labor” creates a social infrastructure of communicative channels that are as
essential to economy as roads, bridges, or telephone lines’ (2010: 452).
The ‘phatic labor’ of the supra that ritually recognizes these networks
is done by toasting, which arranges the social networks of those present
into an orderly cosmology of others informed by considerations of kind
of relationship and attendant mutual obligation. The contemporary supra
is divisible in indigenous terms into two blocks of toasts, the former of
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 164
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 164
2/21/2001 11:33:11 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:11 AM
WINE
165
which are the so-called obligatory or general toasts, the latter of which
are the so-called personal toasts (Nizharadze 2000). Obligatory toasts
diagram the entire social universe from the perspective of one focal
participant who serves as the point of origin or indexical origo , while
personal toasts recognize the concrete relations between those who are
present. 1
First, the focal participant must be recognized in the fi rst toast. The fi rst
toast is a toast to those in whose honour the supra is convened, the birthday
celebrant, the couple whose marriage is being celebrated, the person who
died, or, in the absence of any more specifi c cause, the mere fact of ‘our
meeting here’ is celebrated as the pretext of the supra, so that those present
become the focal participant (Mars and Altman 1991: 273).
This focal participant becomes the indexical point of origin (like the
‘you are here’ on a map, or the ‘ego’ of a kinship diagram, centring
on someone who is actually present at the feast) for the next block of
toasts. 2 Moving outward from the focal participant, the next toasts
demarcate an expanding set of horizons of social relations, beginning
with the kinship universe of the focal participant. This begins with the
immediate household of that person, followed by the siblings and then
the grandparents of the person, and so on. The toasting then moves to
from specifi c to general categories of kin others of the focal participant,
in increasing social distance: relatives, friends, neighbours. In the case of
a funeral, there are two series of this kind, one to honour the deceased
relatives of the deceased, followed by one to honour the living ones.
At this point there can be another qualitative transition from egocentric
categories (others relevant to one specifi c focal participant) to sociocentric
categories, that is, extremely general ‘abstract’ toasts that recognize very
general categories of social others. These include obligatory toasts to
women, as well as ancestors, and children. These three common toasts
produce a very general map of the generalized others that are relevant
to a very generalized male subject, the supra-goer in general. There will
also be ‘abstract’ toasts to very general categories of others, Georgia
and Georgians, perhaps a toast to ‘all good people’. One principle that is
invoked for the transition from obligatory toasts to more abstract toasts is
quite simply physiological drunkenness, a change in the mood provoked
by alcohol consumption. After all, by the time one has run through the
kinship universe of the focal participants, it is likely one will be at least a
little drunk. As one friend of mine who is a practiced observer of the supra
pointed out when explaining the proper occasion for a toast like the one to
‘all good people everywhere’: ‘some toasts just sound stupid and maudlin
when you are sober, to understand those toasts, you need to be a little
drunk’.
Taken together, all these toasts might be conceived of as a block as
obligations that must be paid by those present to those who are absent
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 165
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 165
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
166
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
before they are free to toast each other in ‘personal toasts’. The ‘personal
block of toasts’ moves the supra from a more formal ‘ritual’ to a more
informal expression of mutual affection between the participants, and, of
course, a greater state of inebriation. One diagnostic of a relatively ‘formal’
(wedding, funeral) or offi cial supra, then, is the absence of this block of
toasts. This is often partly a result of the immense size of the feast. In
such circumstances one can group personal toasts under general rubrics,
such as a toast to ‘friends of x’ where all the friends stand to show their
inclusion (so a personal toast becomes, in effect, a general toast). In the
same way, general toast can be made into a personal toast by recognizing
a general class of persons (i.e. children), and recognizing some person(s)
who are present as named representatives of that class. Whatever the
particularities, whether these are delivered individually or mixed in these
ways, this section of toasts follows no set order and there is comparatively
lax regimentation. The only specifi cation is that each person present must
somehow be recognized in a toast.
The relaxation of the ritual order at this point is marked further by
changes along other dimensions. At this point in the supra mostly men
are present, somewhat tipsy if not drunk. This is the point in the supra
where men become openly demonstrative of their emotions in the wording
of their toasts, which typically include extravagant expressions of praise
and a certain amount of homosocial physical affection (Jgerenaia 2000,
Mars and Altman 1991: 276):
After the ‘personal’ stage the supra becomes confused, the tamada loses
his function, all order is lost – every obligation has been discharged and
the supra imperceptibly grows into a carnival or bachannal. . . . Thus, a
supra does not always have order; [order] dominates in the ‘ritual’ stage,
weakens in the [personal toast] stage, and disappears in the stage of
‘carnival’. (Nizharadze 2000: 29)
The supra then begins by producing an orderly ‘cultured’ ritual diagram of
durable social relations centred on a focal participant, then slowly becomes
more rhizomatic and intimate in the personal series of toasts, fi nally
degenerating into a chaotic display of unregulated drinking and affection
(compare Frake’s classic article (1964) on the stages of beer drinking among
the Subanun). Partially this is mediated by the relaxation of the semiotic
order of the supra through distinct qualitative series of toasts, but partially
this is the material effect of the sheer cumulative quantity of drink these
toasts entail. The opposition between ‘cultured supra’ and ‘drunken orgy’
is not only an external opposition between different kinds of events, it is
also a potential opposition emergent within any single event of drinking:
Supras differ in part by how far they are allowed to travel down the road
from an extremely formal ‘cultured supra’ to a drunken orgy.
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 166
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 166
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
WINE
167
The supra as image of the state:
The regulatory order of ritual
As we have seen, the ritual order of toasting produces an image of society
separated from the state. By recognizing a discrete moral universe constituted
by relations of kinship and friendship in toasting, the supra produces a
nesting diagram of the network of social others who are imagined as a
moral order separate from the impersonal bureaucratic order of the state,
but in fact constitute the personal support networks that organize the
informal economy and ‘personalizes’ the impersonal bureaucratic order of
the socialist state (Mars and Altman 1983, 1991). These features of the
ritual order allow the supra to stand explicitly as purifi ed image of society
in opposition to the state, even as the supra latently provides the means for
hybridizing these two orders in practice (Mars and Altman 1991: 276).
However, we have also seen then that supra can also stand for a dystopian
model of the state as an authoritarian and patriarchal anti-democratic
political order. These latter images also arise from other qualitative
possibilities within the formal structure of the ritual itself. A common
Georgian saying goes that ‘We Georgians do not have as much order in the
state as we do in the supra’ (Kinkladze 2000: 31). The tamada, the dictator
of the table, is the symbol par excellence of the supra as a kind of Stalinist
mini-state. The metalanguage of the supra itself is explicitly political.
The institution of the supra is the authoritarian discourse of ritual, full of
‘rules’, many of which are ‘obligatory’ (‘the twelve obligatory toasts’, for
example), many things are ‘forbidden’ (debate about the content of toasts,
for example). Although the tamada, the toastmaster, who enforces the
ritual order, is initially ‘elected’, the election is always rigged, there being
but one candidate, and the outcome of the plebiscite always unanimous.
After the election, the tamada becomes ‘the dictator of the table’. At fi rst
glance, the supra looks very much like a failed democratic transition in
miniature.
The tamada even has a monopoly of legitimate violence at the table, for
the tamada (particularly in Western Georgia, it is said) or his ‘deputies,
representatives’ (
moadgilebi ), can force people to drink (violently),
sometimes having a henchman whose job is to force drinking ( ghvinis
dadzaleba ). In another socialist period cartoon ( Figure 6.9 ), the tamada,
holding a huge drinking horn, which is emblematic of forced drinking, is
saying to the terrifi ed guests: ‘As my deputy in the branch of forcing people
to drink wine I appoint my Jimsher’, a hulking bruiser of a fellow.
This threat of violence is something very real, though Georgians, when
asked about it, will usually claim that it is more characteristic of some
other region. In many rural regions of Georgia, it has been traditional to
drink a toast to the most famous Georgian native son, Josef Stalin. A friend
of mine reports that in 1986 he had the misfortune to refuse to drink the
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 167
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 167
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
168
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.9 ‘As my deputy in the branch of forcing people to drink wine I appoint
my Jimsher’
( Niangi 1974, 17, Artist J. Lolua)
Stalin toast in the region of Borjomi. The hosts were preparing to give him
a sound beating for his impertinence, when it was observed that he had
sprained his ankle the previous day. It was concluded that it wasn’t proper
to beat a man with a sprained ankle, and he was saved.
State, society and the supra:
The politicization of everyday life
As a metaphor, the regulatory order of supra provides ample materials for
the discussion of the political condition of Georgia. Many postsocialist
discourses about the supra mirror socialist state critiques by turning this
metaphoric resemblance into a metonymic, indexical relationship: what if
the root cause of the various maladies of the Georgian political condition
(authoritarianism, endemic corruption, etc.) can be found in the everyday
practice of the supra? The critique of the supra moves from a resource for
the discussion of politics to a political object in itself, to critique or change
the supra is a way to critique or change the political order of Georgia as a
whole. Hence, in the postsocialist period, drinking events that challenge
the hegemony of the supra are themselves cast as political alternatives: they
are not merely alternatives to the supra, like drinking beer, they are anti-
supras designed to supplant it.
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 168
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 168
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:12 AM
WINE
169
Democracies of drink
In November 2001, I am sitting at a supra, as a guest of my neighbours; it’s
a birthday party. One of the guests seated beside me is another neighbour,
Tsitsino, who has heard there will be an American guest with whom she
can practice her English. After verifying that her English is as good as she
says it is, we talk a bit in our secret code. The conversation turns to the
supra itself and she confi des in me that she is not especially fond of supras.
Later, in another conversation, she tells me that she has recently celebrated
her birthday. Remembering that she, like most Georgian women, dislikes
supras, I jokingly ask her what sort of supra she had for her birthday
party. She said: ‘We didn’t have a supra, we had a “democracy”.’ I asked
her what a ‘democracy’ was, and she said in a ‘democracy’ there was no
tamada , or toastmaster, to tell people what to do. Therefore, there were no
‘stupid rules’, as she put it, and hence, people just did what they felt like
doing, drank, danced, whatever. She identifi ed this as a ‘Western’ mode of
behaviour, like a cocktail party.
In intelligentsia critiques of the supra, too, other alternative everyday
drinking events are explicitly explored for their political possibilities. One
of these is the event which bears the name alapurshet’i (derived, it is thought,
from the French phrase a la fourchette (Tuite 2005)). This is basically a
Western reception, a cocktail party associated with presentations of
academic publications (Jgerenaia 2000). Resembling a so-called democracy,
but without its revolutionary aims, the alapurshet’i is distinguished from
supra fi rst of all by the fact that at a supra one sits at a common table,
while at an alapurshet’i one stands. With this simple stipulation, the entire
ritual order of the supra becomes impossible, for without a group seated at
a table, there can be no dictator of the table, no tamada. If the ‘democracy’
is a revolutionary innovation of recent years championed by, among others,
young professional women like Tsitsino, then the alapurshet’i is a ritual
patiently endured by men of the older socialist vintage ‘supra generation’ as
part and parcel of the public, alienated realm of work. If the ‘democracy’
belongs to the kingdom of freedom, the alapurshet’i belongs to the kingdom
of necessity. As often as not, the alapurshet’i is simply created by the lack
of money necessary to have a supra, as one friend ruefully noted to me.
In observed practice, an alapurshet’i is an abnormal, unsettled, unhappy
compromise genre, constantly teetering on the boundary of becoming a
supra. It begins in corners of the room, where men gather, standing, in twos
and threes, and deliver half-hearted toasts. Finally, a table is brought in, a
tamada is appointed, and the revolutionary experiment is over.
Therefore, Georgians who might fi nd themselves at home in an
alapurshet’i would represent a new kind of Georgian, what one observer
has called ‘the reception- fourchette Georgian, the subject of the future
Georgian democracy, who have washed away from their brain both supra
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 169
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 169
2/21/2001 11:33:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:13 AM
170
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
toasts and sentimental details from the history of Georgia’ (Jgerenaia
2000: 38). As a structurally opposed form of anti-supra, the alapurshet’i
does indeed illustrate a utopian model of a very different Georgia, which
is why it has assumed so much importance in the writings of Georgian
civil society theorists (for whom, as intellectuals, it assumes a much more
salient role in everyday practice). However, in real terms, this anti-ritual
surely too marginal to serve as the basis for any future social revolution,
the ‘democracy’ of the younger generation appears to be a more direct
opponent, since it is a form chosen willingly. The alapurshet’i and the
‘democracy’ are highly politicized anti-supras; they are rivalrous with the
hegemony of the supra, since they involve consumption of ritual drinks in
a non-ritualized manner.
The supra and civil society: Elite debates
about the supra
Alongside such anti-supras, Georgian print culture has produced in the
last decade rather a lot of highly contentious politicized metadiscourse
about the supra, centring around a series of papers collected in 2000 (some
of them of earlier vintage) under the title ‘The Supra and Civil Society’
(Nodia et al. 2000) and reactions to these papers. This debate polarized
into two basic recognized opposed tendencies within Georgian elite
urban culture, a traditionalizing discourse and a modernizing one. The
traditionalist discourse on the supra is current among traditional socialist
elites of the older generation, the so-called old intelligentsia. The liberal
modernist discourse on the supra is associated with new third sector elites,
what are now called the ‘new intellectuals’, as well as young professionals
like my neighbour Tsitsino (Nodia 2002, Zurabishvili 2002, Shatirishvili
2003). The two discourses are lodged in disciplinary discourses that have
different institutional locations, genealogies, epistemologies and prospects
for the future. The traditionalist discourse is one that grounds itself in
traditional socialist period ‘intelligentsia’ disciplines like archaeology,
ethnography, history. The modernizing discourse is a critique emanating
from NGO personnel funded by Western grants, and young, often Western-
educated, professionals and academics. (After the Rose Revolution of
2003, it should be added, some of these NGOs have become, in effect,
organs of the government (Manning 2007b).) Arguments between the
two groups have not been cordial. Traditionalist intelligentsia criticize the
‘new intellectuals’ of the NGO (and now government) world for being
unpatriotic as Georgians, or dilettantish as scholars (Gociridze 2001,
Pruidze 2001). They even identify the world of NGOs as being a world of
corruption paralleling that of the state itself, but in which krtamich’amia ,
‘bribe-eating’ associated with state agents is replaced with grantich’amia
‘grant-eating’ (Mühlfried 2005a).
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 170
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 170
2/21/2001 11:33:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:13 AM
WINE
171
The hegemonic discourse of Georgian nationalism and traditionalism
about the supra matches very nearly the traditionalizing tendencies internal
to the ritual itself. This discourse presents the supra as a ritual present
in various local forms in Georgian culture since time immemorial, often
going further to link the origins of the ritual variously to the Last Supper,
to quasi-parliamentary tendencies and in particular oath rituals during the
reign of Queen Tamar, the golden age of Georgia, or the Mediterranean cult
of Dionysius (Tezelishvili 2000: 138–43). Hence, the supra is not merely
an image of Georgian society, but a specifi cally traditional society, which
ethnographers and historians actively seek to preserve.
Contemporary traditionalists now defend the tradition of the supra
against the revisionist critiques of NGO based intellectuals. However, in the
socialist period, these same intellectuals were agents of the socialist state,
and found many good reasons to criticize everyday practices of the supra
ritual, in the name of creating (or restoring) a putatively more ‘cultured’
(refi ned, civilized) version of the ritual that had apparently existed at some
point in the past. One traditionalist ethnographer recalls times when, in
the 1960s, the beginning of a period of relative prosperity in Soviet culture,
precisely the deleterious material consequences and uncultured aspects of
the supra were the object of critique:
In every such family we saw the tables, chairs, dishes and entire
collections of drinking vessels in many shapes and sizes necessary for a
big supra. This exaggerated display of hospitality, which took the form
of a meaningless competition, was censured by me and my colleagues,
we appealed to the population for moderation. We also censured the
practice of forcing drinking, the throwing of supras for purposes of self-
interest, the immoderate drinking and eating, using tradition as a cover
for drunkenness, etc. . . . (Pruidze 2001: 12)
But a critique of contemporary ritual practice from the authoritative position
of ethnographic tradition is possible only if tradition itself is unchanging. The
discourse of the new NGO elites seeks to undermine such primordialism,
instead presenting the supra as an ‘invented tradition’ created by members
of the Georgian gentry of the nineteenth century as a reaction to Russian
colonial rule. 3 According to this maverick thesis (articulated by Bregadze
2000), for the Georgian gentry, the supra became a kind of compensatory
private locus of traditional authenticity in opposition to the Russian rituals
of the imperial court society into which they had been incorporated:
For the last two hundred years, when the socio-political life of Georgia
developed under the sign of the domination of a ‘foreign’, ‘dictatorial’
order, the order of the supra became a symbol of true authenticity: ‘We
still have this’, the sacralization of the structure of the supra was society’s
response to the shock of modernization. (Nodia 2000: 5)
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 171
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 171
2/21/2001 11:33:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:13 AM
172
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The supra, as an invented tradition, presents as tradition what actually
is an invention, and this move radically undermines the traditionalist
position, producing no end of acrimonious argument between the two
sides. But this is not all, the ‘invented tradition’ of the supra was also, it
turns out, the only Georgian institution that met the formal defi nition of
‘civil society’ (a category much favoured by NGO intellectuals as well as,
coincidentally, Western funding agencies) during the same period, to wit:
The supra is a form of the free self-organization of persons, in it society
embodies its autonomy in opposition to a repressive context dictated
by the state, at the same time, the unit of self-organization is typically
bigger, than the family. (Nodia 2000: 6)
But this formal alignment of the supra with modern civil society is
premature, the specifi c content of the ritual order is decidedly ‘uncivil’, in
fact, it is precisely the formal comparison with an idealized model of civil
society that allows its substantive content to be found to be autocratic and
repressive. The very authenticity and ritual stabilization of the invented
tradition makes it hegemonic.
The Georgian supra has many things about it that are obviously
‘uncivil’. It is characterized by the autocratic dictatorship of the (it is
true, elected) tamada, unacceptability of pluralism and criticism of
ideas, a predetermined routine, the obviously subordinated position of
women . . . . In short, the supra is a model of authoritarian relationships.
With its ritually-stabilized form, the supra refl ected the repressive
nature of its existing surrounding social life, and by creating an illusion
of ‘authenticity’, it made it easy for society to accept it. Nothing could
better serve to inculcate the legitimacy of the Communist order than the
toast to Stalin and the ‘Stalinization’ of the institution of the tamada
itself. (Nodia 2000: 5)
Here again, postsocialist NGO discourses about the supra reproduce a
disemic image of the ritual. On the one hand, it is an ‘antipolitical’ image
of all that was opposed to the Russian and later socialist state, a kind of
subaltern Georgian discourse opposed to Russian colonization, a hidden
discourse of the ‘missing’ sphere of civil society. On the other hand, the
supra would seem to contain within it an almost exact metaphor for
socialist state itself. Where the traditionalist discourse grounds the supra
in a primordial tradition which must be protected from ongoing revisionist
theories and practices of modernity, the NGO modernizer discourse
instead casts the supra as a refl ex of modernization itself: as an ‘invented
tradition’ it represents a fabrication of an authentic tradition in reaction to
the shock of colonization and modernity; as a kind of ‘failed’ indigenous
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 172
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 172
2/21/2001 11:33:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:14 AM
WINE
173
form of modern ‘civil society’, the supra is understandable as a product of
modernization, but also a barrier to further modernization.
The rise and fall of the socialist supra
The late socialist period was a period of relatively material abundance,
at least in Georgia, and therefore, this period was the ‘golden age’ of the
supra. Probably at no other time in Georgia’s history had so many supras
been thrown, by so many, with such an abundance of food and drink.
Here socialism could claim that the technocratic socialist productive
‘base’ was truly democratizing the ‘superstructure’ of the national form
of consumption, the supra. But it was a mutual dependence. As I have
suggested above, the ‘phatic labor’ of the supra (like blat and tolkachi in
Russia) also created and sustained informal networks that served in turn
as a kind of infrastructure that made both everyday consumption and state
production possible as well. The quantitative proliferation of supras under
socialism reveals the ways that the supra was both an expression of socialist
production and also an indispensable part of it.
But socialism also transformed the supra from within, qualitatively and
morally. Regardless of whether one sides with traditional accounts of the
supra as an unchanging expression of timeless Georgianness or revisionist
accounts of the ritual which date it to the incorporation of Georgian elites
under Russian rule in the nineteenth century, there is no question that the
form of the ritual as we have it today looks very different from anything
we see in the nineteenth century. First of all, in material terms, the ritual
takes its name from a tablecloth ( supra ). But in the nineteenth century,
the tablecloth was as often as not laid on the ground in one of the gardens
surrounding Tbilisi and people sat on the ground; in the twentieth century,
the supra usually takes place indoors, the tablecloth is always on a table,
and people sit in chairs. In moral terms, the supra is now categorized in
terms of an opposition between a relatively civilized ‘cultured supra’ and
an uncultured ‘orgy’ ( ghreoba ); in nineteenth-century representations, we
see plenty of evidence that features that are associated with the ghreoba
(fi stfi ghts, drunkenness, etc.), may well have been the most typical form.
What I would like to suggest is that Stalinist attempts to civilize everyday
practices of comportment and consumption (what was generally called
‘culturedness’, kul’turnost’ ) left their mark on the supra, so that the supra
is socialist not only in material content, but also in form.
For example, a cartoon from the Stalin period ( Figure 6.10 ), titled
‘Technology decides’, seems to be making a typically socialist technocratic
argument that socialist technology (specifi cally in the sphere of transport,
note the airplane prominently visible through the window which is also the
topic of conversation) has produced a material infrastructure that enables
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 173
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 173
2/21/2001 11:33:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:14 AM
174
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 6.10 Technology decides
‘Host, what in the world are you making us wait for? The supra [lit. tablecloth] is
spread, isn’t it?’
‘I am waiting for one more guest, he left Svaneti ten minutes ago.’
‘From Svaneti? Then how many days must we wait for him?’
‘What do days have to do with it? In our village we already have an airport!’
( Niangi 1941, 2, Artist G. Isaev)
the superstructural sphere of national culture (the supra) to prosper in
ways previously unimaginable. We see also a domestic interior decorated
with a balance of traditional and modern furnishings, where a supra is
laid out, a ‘cultured supra’ in which there is plenty of everything without
excess. The host is reading a newspaper, others are happily engaged in
singing, dancing, playing the piano and preparing the supra. The guest
(who looks a bit like Stalin) is saying ‘Host, what in the world are you
making us wait for? The supra [lit. tablecloth] is spread, isn’t it?’ The
unhurried host (who looks even more like Stalin) replies: ‘I am waiting
for one more guest, he left Svaneti [the paradigmatic example of a distant
inaccessible mountainous region] ten minutes ago.’ The incredulous guest
asks ‘From Svaneti? Then how many days must we wait for him?’ The host
replies ‘What do days have to do with it? In our village we already have
an airport!’
At this supra, of course, the technocratic work of socialism is visible not
only in the technology (the airplane) but also the material plenty, exhibited by
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 174
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 174
2/21/2001 11:33:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:14 AM
WINE
175
the food and drink on the table. But that does not exhaust the contributions
of socialist material culture to the scene. Consider the interior of the house,
there are tasselled curtains, a polka dot lampshade, a rug on the fl oor,
a table with a tablecloth, vases with fl owers, paintings on the walls, and
even a piano. All these features (particularly the curtains, tablecloth and
lampshade) together produce what could be called a ‘cultured interior’, a set of
material objects that both symbolized Stalinist ‘culturedness’ ( kul’turnost’ )
and also acted to instil it. According to the ideology of
kul’turnost’ ,
‘[t]he objects that surrounded people, their material environment, became
instrumental in changing their habits and attitudes. The constant presence
of certain objects was supposed to instill kul’turnost’ . Among the items of
everyday domestic equipment associated with the norms of civilized life,
three became fetishized . . . curtains, lampshades and tablecloths’ (Kelly
and Volkov 1998: 298–9). As Volkov emphasizes, these cultured objects
were not just random emblems of petit-bourgeois aspirations, they worked
together ‘to form a specifi c “object-system” or an “equipmental matrix”, in
which all the elements presupposed one another and together constituted
the material infrastructure of kul’turnost ’ (Volkov 2000: 222). Curtains,
for example, helped to create a private space by limiting observability;
lampshades allowed the modulation of lighting to create a comfortable
private space and adjust the lighting for different occasions; tablecloths ‘tied
together diet, hygiene and manners’ (Volkov 2000: 222). While all these
items together produce a sense of a ‘cultured interior’, the tablecloth from
which the supra takes its name is most signifi cant in the way it has shifted
from something thrown onto the ground outside to something placed on
a table inside. Where in the nineteenth century, Georgians at a supra were
often portrayed sitting on the ground around a tablecloth in an ‘oriental’
fashion, they are now usually portrayed as sitting in chairs at a table in a
‘Western’ style. To the extent that the tablecloth ( supra ) that stands for the
feast as a whole becomes integrated into the object-system that produces
the cultured interior, then the supra itself becomes a ‘cultured’ form.
All this talk of culturedness should remind us of the idealized Georgian
model of the ‘cultured supra’, which is so often opposed to the material
and uncultured drunken excesses of the ‘orgy’ (ghreoba). There is little
doubt that most of the features associated with the ‘cultured supra’ both on
the moral plane (toasting rife with references to classical authors, poetry,
singing, dancing) as well as the material plane (sitting at a table with a
tablecloth and an endless supply of little china plates to eat off) have a solid
pedigree in this concept. Ultimately, the socialist state, in its search for
indigenous national traditions out of which to fashion the internationalist
culture of homo sovieticus , came to smile on the supra, and elements of the
supra tradition, the tamada, saying toasts, were propagated throughout the
Soviet Union (Nizharadze 2000: 26). Certainly, as Mars and Altman point
out (1991: 270), the socialist state frequently criticized various aspects of
the supra, but it is worth emphasizing that this was not criticism of the
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 175
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 175
2/21/2001 11:33:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:15 AM
176
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
supra as such, but criticism of the excesses and misuse of the ‘material
supra’ ( ghreoba ) from the perspective of the idealized ‘cultured supra’.
One legacy of Stalinism then is the general distinction between ‘cultured
supras’ and ‘drunken orgies’ ( ghreoba ). But if the moral ‘cultured supra’ is
at least in part a socialist legacy, so was the ghreoba , the materialist supra
characterized by quantitative excess of food and drink made available by
socialism. What is missing from the postsocialist supra is this quantitative
dimension: people are much poorer now, ‘three and four storey’ supras
have become much rarer. In addition, as Ledeneva has noted from Russian
drinking practices (1998: 205), the postsocialist supra is no longer as
freighted with creating and sustaining the informal networks that were
essential for life under socialism. In the postsocialist period of grinding
poverty, it has become clear that the socialist period was also the golden
age of Georgian hospitality and the supra.
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 176
9781441160188_Ch06_Final_txt_print.indd 176
2/21/2001 11:33:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:33:15 AM
CHAPTER SEVEN
Vodka
Vodka is the drink of devils
– Khevsur saying
Georgia’s northern border is framed by the high peaks of the Caucasus
mountains. Among Georgians of the plains, these mountainous regions,
especially the region of Khevsureti, have become legendary as being
places of mystery and romance, living museums, where, it is said, ancient
traditions of the Georgians, since lost in the plains, have long been
preserved. Or so the story goes. In reality, the mountainous villages of
Khevsureti have participated fully in modern Georgian history, often
fatefully. The highland region of Khevsureti, a centre of Georgian national
mythology, was completely depopulated in the 1950s at the command of
Stalin, and the population entirely moved to the plains (an event which is
represented as a voluntary act in the macabre irony of the 1954 socialist
realist fi lm They Came Down from the Mountains ). Ironically, socialist era
fi lms that popularized the idea of these mountain regions as being places
of romanticism and exoticism were themselves only made possible by this
depopulation, which turned inhabited highland villages into uninhabited
picturesque settings for socialist fi lms set in the pre-socialist period
(Manning 2007a).
The story I am telling in this chapter deals mostly with the period before
these events, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries when
the contemporary lifestyle of the mountains was coming to be imagined
by Georgian ethnographers as a still image of unchanging tradition
in explicit opposition to the modernity of the plains, later becoming an
offi cially sanctioned socialist image of the idealized national past. Many
of the ethnographic accounts we have from this period are the work of
indigenous ethnographers. These insider accounts give us a unique picture
of the private side of indigenous life neglected by outsiders. These include
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 177
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 177
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
178
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
local traditions of romance, called sts’orproba , which are constituted by
the parallel circulation of both vodka and poetry. I will show how the local
economy of love is also an economy of poetry and of drink, constituting a
minor, subaltern sphere of circulation in which the agents are girls, whose
stolen vodka and love poems form a private sphere of circulation opposed
to the indigenous public sphere mediated by beer and epic poetry in which
older men represent the community as a whole.
As in the plains, in the mountains most rituals of daily life are attended
by feasts accompanied by ritualized drinking. However, in the plains the
ritual drink par excellence is wine (sometimes vodka), while beer is an
entirely profane, everyday drink, not suitable for ritual consumption
at all. In the mountains of Khevsureti, however, beer takes the pride
of place as the sacred, ritual drink, and vodka is the everyday drink,
though as the unmarked member of the pair, it too, has ritual contexts of
consumption. 1 Because vodka takes on its values in relationship to beer,
and the respective contexts of production, circulation and consumption
of these drinks, ritual and non-ritual, to understand vodka we also need
to understand beer.
Given that the Khevsurs say that ‘vodka is the drink of devils’, it
would seem that they take a rather dim view of vodka. One might think
that they consider it evil, to be avoided, much as when we speak of ‘the
demon drink’, in reference to its destructive capabilities. Indeed, Khevsurs
frequently blame vodka, in much the same way as they blame women, for
the frequent fi ghting and duelling between young men which attends social
events (Baliauri 1991: 127). But Khevsurs do not shun vodka: any ritual
that involves drinking (and most of them do) will involve large quantities of
home-brewed vodka as well as the ‘ritual’ drink, beer. Vodka is held in high
esteem, and is respected, even in spite of its ‘demonic’ associations.
Taken as opposites, beer and vodka stand for, constitute, and mediate
different kinds of social relations, different trajectories of social circulation
and different images of social life. Beer stands for the idealized image of the
community as an extension of the local shrine, an image produced in rituals
where beer is the primary drink, while vodka is the image of individual
social relationships between individuals, an amorphous, rhizomatic set of
relations including all those mediated by beer as well as those between
hosts and guests, or between lovers or strangers who meet on the road.
Beer is also the image of what one might think of as an indigenous public
sphere of ritual activity, one in which the men of the community take on a
kind of what Habermas calls ‘representative publicity’ (Habermas 1992),
where a part of the community represents (in ‘public’ contexts of ritual and
battle) the whole community. By contrast, vodka is associated with ‘private’
relations between individuals and families both within the community and
outside of it. Beer is an image of the social, vodka of the sociable (compare
Karp 1980: 84 on beer as image of the social among the Iteso).
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 178
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 178
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
VODKA
179
Stolen vodka, furtive kisses and whispered
poems: The circulation of adolescent romance
But vodka is most associated with indigenous Khevsur practices of
premarital romance, sts’orproba , a kind of premarital dalliance between
young people of the same community who are ineligible to be married to
one another (for details see Tuite 2000, Manning 2007a). Let me pause
to emphasize that point: this is not a form of premarital courtship, the
two involved in the relationship may never marry, and the relationship
must remain ‘without seed’ (briefl y, the physical manifestation of this
romance must not lead to childbirth). Romance and marriage among the
Khevsurs belong to absolutely opposed worlds. Each such relationship is to
a greater or lesser extent a tragic one, but at the same time, because these
doomed relationships have no recognized public properties, obligations or
consequences, they represent almost a ‘play form’ of romance as a form of
unencumbered, unconstrained, inconsequential sociability between peers
(for sociability as the ‘play form’ of sociality, see Simmel 1949). Among the
Khevsurs,
Sts’orproba begins this way: a woman goes with one bottle of vodka
to lie down with a boy, even if they don’t know each other close up
and only like each other from afar. First – kissing, lying in each others
arms, hugging and caressing with great shyness and restraint happens,
but later, when they little by little get to know one another, this hugging
and kissing becomes freer. (Tevdoradze 1930: 131)
Gifts of vodka form an important motif in the poetry associated with
sts’orproba . The following Khevsur poem makes the role of a gift of stolen
vodka clear, but is one of many of its type:
When the dark of the night has come, a woman rejoices in her heart,
She longs to see her dzmobili [boyfriend], it would be hard to keep her
away,
The lad as well, full of eagerness, cannot take time to eat his meal.
He goes and readies the bed for her, lays the sheets, fl uffs up the straw,
Heart is working its magic on heart; at the same time, he is thinking
‘Could it be, she will not come, or that something has gone awry?’
The woman approaches, with quiet steps, she draws not a rustle from
the straw.
In her hand she carries a bottle of vodka, stolen from her home.
(Tevdoradze 1930: 139–40; the translation is adapted from Tuite 2000: 42)
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 179
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 179
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
180
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
As if to emphasize the purely egalitarian, uncoerced and sociable nature
of this form of romance, partners of this relationship sometimes call each
other sts’orperi ‘friend, peer’ (particularly if the relationship is more casual),
but if the bond deepens, the term dzmobili ‘sworn brother’ is used for both
the boyfriend and the girlfriend (the term ‘sworn sister’, dobili , unlike a
true sworn-sibling relationship, is not used in the context of this relation
for the girl partner, possibly because there is a kind of female demonic
consort of male shrine divinity called a ‘dobili’). In cases of ambiguity, the
term sandauri dzmobili ‘desired sworn brother’ is used to distinguish the
romantic opposite-sex relationship (involving ‘desire’) from ordinary sworn
brotherhood (Baliauri 1991: 8).
The similarity of the terminology can be confusing, so it is worth
making clear how the terminology used in romantic relations differs
from artifi cial kinship. Normally, the term dzmobiloba (the relationship
of sworn brothers, dzmobili ) would denote a kind of artifi cial kinship
between young men. The feminine equivalent is dobiloba (the relationship
between sworn sisters, dobili ). Like the romantic relationship that carries
the same name, sworn siblinghood can be an elective expression of
closeness and friendship between two boys or two girls (or even a girl and
a boy) who might, for example, be from different villages (Ochiauri 1980:
210–11). There are strategic uses of non-romantic sworn siblinghood
as well, each of which link this friendship to the romantic ‘boyfriend–
girlfriend’ version. For example, the sworn-sibling relationship can be
forced upon two young men to reconcile them after a fi ght (Ochiauri
1980: 210–11, Baliauri 1991: 125), and whatever young men might say
was the cause of the fi ght, jealousy and romantic rivalry often fi gures
as a major (concealed) motive alongside simple drunkenness (Baliauri
1991: 126–7). In other cases, girls from different villages might become
sworn siblings, or force their brothers to become sworn siblings with a
particular boy in another village, in order to provide excuses for visiting
that village to facilitate sts’orproba with that boy or another boy there
(Ochiauri 1980: 210).
Khevsur myths of the origins of sts’orproba link the two homonymous
relationships genealogically. According to the Khevsur myth, the cross-
sex romantic dalliance of dzmobiloba grew out of functional necessity
because of the constant danger of enemy attacks, which forced boys and
girls to sleep in close proximity. As a result of the sexual dangers of this
close physical proximity, such boys and girls, it is said, were made to swear
oaths of siblinghood (Baliauri 1991: 8–9). One might see here another
explanation for the curious fact that in the cross-sex relationship both
the boy and the girl call each other ‘sworn brother’ ( dzmobili ), as if the
romantic possibilities of the relationship were being erased by neutralizing
the opposed genders of the partners, treating the girl, as well as the boy,
as ‘brothers’.
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 180
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 180
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:12 AM
VODKA
181
Gift exchange: Silver rings and stolen vodka
Both kinds of dzmobiloba relationship (boyfriend–girlfriend and sworn
siblinghood) share a feature other than using the same terminology in
Khevsureti: Both kinds of relationship are initiated by drinking vodka
together, and in general vodka is the fuel of both relationship types
throughout. 2 In the constant visiting that characterizes both relationships,
a dzmobili (the party in motion) ‘goes with vodka’ when visiting another
dzmobili , whether the dzmobili is actually a girl visiting her lover with a
bottle at night, secretly, or a boy visiting his sworn brother by day, openly
(Ochiauri 1980: 208–11). 3
Both relationships are marked by other parallel gift exchanges between
the partners, called sadzmobilo gifts (gifts for the dzmobili ) in both cases.
In both romantic and non-romantic forms of dzmobiloba , the person that
receives the opening gift of vodka ( sadzmobilo vodka) from the visitor will
respond with a sadzmobilo gift of a different kind, an object which is kept
to remember the other: in the case of true sworn brothers, a copper pot, a
short sword or some weapon, given openly for all to see (Ochiauri 1980:
210); in the case of a dzmobili girlfriend, in addition to saving him bottles
of vodka, she will sew and embroider gifts for him (secretly, often when
she is supposed to be working), while her dzmobili boyfriend will carve
wooden objects for her own use, and give her silk scarves, silver rings and
accordions.
Gifts between sworn brothers are given openly, but gifts between
boyfriends and girlfriends are given indirectly and secretly. The girl gives
the boy things by the hand of an ‘ambassador’ (the person who also arranges
romantic trysts), the boy through some relative (Baliauri 1991: 64–5).
This is an important difference between the two forms of dzmobiloba :
the ‘sworn siblinghood’ relationship (typically same sex between boys), we
might say, is publicly recognized, beginning with a publicly witnessed toast,
the opposite-sex ‘boyfriend–girlfriend’ relationship is secretive, furtive and
private.
The vodka girls save for their boyfriends is almost always ‘stolen’, vodka
which has been furtively taken out of the world of open exchange, and
hidden for private purposes. For Khevsur girls, stealing and saving vodka
for the boyfriend is a sign of love, of waiting, of pining, of marking time
apart and expectation of time to be spent together in the future. It is also
part of a relationship of reciprocity, for the just as the woman saves for the
man a stolen bottle of vodka, so the man will bring the woman sadzmobilo
gifts, as in this poem:
He brought you for your sadzmobilo , a three ruble music box,
You in turn saved for him a bottle of sparkling vodka. (Ochiauri 1980: 125)
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 181
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 181
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
182
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Such sadzmobilo gifts, gifts like silver rings, which are given by boys to
girls and girls to boys, are kept as reminders of the relationship. The silver
ring is worn publicly, but its signifi cance is hidden. If asked, they will say
the ring was a gift from a deceased relative and they keep it as a reminder.
Other objects, woven or carved gifts especially, are also kept as durable
reminders, in fact, carefully kept to be carried to the grave.
Keeping the gift is a sign of devotion, giving it is a test: the boy takes a
ring off his fi nger and gives it to the girl, saying ‘You will keep it, you know,
you won’t keep it, you know’. Sometimes a boy will test a girl in a casual
dalliance by offering her or asking from her a ring, to see if she will assent.
If she gives such a ring, in a context where there is no trust, he might then
give it to someone else, which would be insulting to her (Baliauri 1991:
123). Sometimes a boy will test a girl by making a secret mark on the ring,
so he will recognize it if she gives it, in turn, to someone else. If he sees it on
another’s hand, he will become angry, and sometimes challenge the other
boy by throwing a cup of vodka or beer in his face, if they are at a ritual
drinking event. The ensuing fi ght will be brutal, but no one will know
precisely why they are fi ghting. This is one of the many ways that men’s
duelling is secretly fuelled by romance.
Sometimes the two boys will be forcibly reconciled (somewhat
ineffectively) by being forced to become actual sworn brothers (again, in
a public ritual involving vodka), but it will not be really resolved until the
girl somehow gets the ring back from the other boy. Upon getting it back,
the girl will smash the ring with a stone, wrap it in something and send it
back to the boy who gave it (Baliauri 1991: 67–9). The same scenario of a
twice-given ring is possible for girls, too, but girls have fewer sanctions to
ensure the return of the ring. The situation may similarly degenerate into a
fi st fi ght between the girls and threats directed at the boy, which, however,
are not taken seriously by the boy (Baliauri 1991: 70).
Both boys and girls can give and receive silver rings as sadzmobilo gifts,
but only girls steal and hide bottled vodka for boys (Baliauri 1991: 65).
Vodka keeps indefi nitely, and keeping vodka can be used to mark time spent
waiting for a moment when it can be given. A saved up bottle of vodka can
be a haunting reminder of an anticipated event of drinking together that
never materialized. In the following, a poem composed by a jilted lover,
the vodka the girl saved for seven weeks will now be drunk with someone
else, where they will drink toasts with that same vodka to the faithless one,
until dawn. But the vodka here is poured for another girl, not a boy. Just
as a ring, once given, can never be worn again by anyone else, but must be
smashed with a rock, vodka saved by a girl for a boy cannot be consumed
with another boy, the only way to get rid of it is to drink it with a girl:
When you told me, that you lied to me, ‘I will come in autumn’
I had a bottle of vodka awaiting you.
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 182
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 182
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
VODKA
183
Seven weeks have gone by, a sliver got stuck in my throat,
I will pour for Melania, your toast,
We will take turns drinking, we will drink til dawn.
(Baliauri 1991: 155)
Far from being the ‘drink of devils’, vodka seems much more like ‘the drink
of lovers’. But vodka is also a pervasive mediator and sign of relations of
sociability of all kinds. Vodka, like beer, is a pervasive drink, needed for
every sort of social ritual event, and is brewed by the average family 40
times a year at least:
[B]ecause without vodka, by local rule, nothing can be done, neither
the cost of a funeral, nor weddings, nor reconciling enemies, neither
women can become sworn sisters nor men can become sworn brothers,
regard cannot be shown for relatives, nor sowing nor harvest and many
other customs. Everything requires vodka, beer is required on the other
hand for more heavy and serious matters, but even then vodka is also
considered necessary. Khevsurs have a good opinion of vodka. (Baliauri
1991: 154)
Beer has a specialized ritual function, but still, vodka is everywhere where
beer is, and everywhere it isn’t too. If vodka and brewing vodka are pervasive
generalized signs of sociability, vodka has a particular heightened, and
somewhat opposed, signifi cance for young women, corresponding to the
heightened expression of sociability associated with romance. Bottles of
vodka are the generalized currency of romance, and hence when and where
vodka is being brewed, there too are young women, seeking to beg, borrow
or steal special bottles of vodka:
When a family brews vodka, if they have a young woman in the
household, she asks, ‘Please fi ll me one mina (bottle, lit “glass”)!’ and
tries to ensure that they fi ll it with good vodka. She asks parents and
brothers alike for this. Sometimes even fellow villagers will fi ll a bottle
of vodka for a young woman, uncles and cousins will joke with her,
‘when I am suffering, then give me some to drink!’ But in reality they
cannot be given back the vodka she has requested. They say this in jest.
(Baliauri 1991: 154)
They will also tease her to ‘Have whoever you pour this vodka for say a
toast to me’, knowing she will do no such thing. Since girls will always have
saved up bottles of good vodka hidden somewhere, a guest might joke with
a young girl ‘I don’t want this vodka, pour me the saved up bottled vodka
of the girls!’
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 183
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 183
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
184
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The vodka of girls is ‘stolen’ because it is taken out of general circulation
of the rest of the vodka of the household. For adult men, vodka is the
generalized currency of hospitality and sociability: its value derives from
its open-handed expenditure. At weddings, for example, the hosts must not
only brew considerable quantities of beer, but they must make a massive
prestation of bottled vodka; the groom must personally give a bottle of
vodka to each guest which they use to drink a toast to him (Makalatia 1984:
171, 173). Men travelling to visit friends and relatives will always ‘go with
vodka’, and they also will carry ‘road vodka’ ( sagzao araqi ) because they
must offer vodka to everyone they meet, even if the vodka is needed at the
destination. For men not to do so is considered to be quite shameful, stingy
or ‘mother-minded’ ( deda-chk’ua ). Apparently, open-handed generosity is
a masculine virtue, contrasted with feminine stinginess (Ochiauri 1980: 7,
14–15). But girls are not stingy, because their vodka is stolen and hidden
away. The stolen vodka of girls is withdrawn from general consumption
and saved in small glass bottles for personal use. It no longer belongs to the
generalized reciprocity, the public sphere of masculine generosity, which is
directed to kin, friends and strangers alike. The stolen vodka of girls is a
private gift, a gift hidden away and saved up for intimates.
The road vodka carried by men is often quite weak. It is carried to
protect the better vodka to be drunk at the destination, since men who
are travelling must offer each person they pass on the road a drink of
vodka, thus revealing a hidden masculine stinginess as well. By contrast,
the vodka of girls must always be the best and the strongest. Men must
give vodka freely to all and sundry (hence the need for weak, watery ‘road
vodka’ addressed ‘to whom it may concern’ to protect the good vodka
that has specifi c addressees). In contrast, girls not only save the vodka
they have been given, they also save vodka stolen when and where they
can from whomever they can (Baliauri 1991: 154). The jokes directed
at young women draw attention to the inapplicability of principles of
masculine generosity to the begged, stolen, saved up vodka of girls: the
important thing is not the means by which she gets it, but that once she
has it, she hides it, saves it. Vodka is at once both the medium of masculine
generalized reciprocity and its feminine opposite.
The Khevsur girl saves vodka, but for whom? A girl will bring her
vodka out for special guests, she will bring it out when the young people
gather apart from the adults, and especially, if the girl has a boyfriend in
the village, she brings it to him, if they meet alone. But here the practice
is a little different, because unlike in the other cases, it is not consumed,
or rather, the boy drinks a little, and saves the rest: ‘The boy will in turn
take this vodka and drink it with two or three other friends, though none
will ask who brought him this vodka, nor will he himself say. But he is
pleased that girls save vodka for him’ (Baliauri 1991: 154–5). The girl saves
vodka for her specifi c boy, as a sign for him and him alone; the boy in
turn freely distributes this vodka in a more typically masculine manner
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 184
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 184
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
VODKA
185
among his friends, without identifying the source, but for a boy to have
vodka is usually in itself a sign of a girl’s prior gift of vodka. The individual
sharing can become a general vodka redistribution, if, for example, all the
village boys gather together in the village square, then by defi nition all
the boyfriends of all the girls in the village will be gathered there too. The
boys will say ‘Well, girls, whoever has right now bottles saved up at home,
bring them here, you have saved them up for your boyfriends, right now
we (boys) are all here, pour for us, your boyfriends, too, if here you have
someone’ (Baliauri 1991: 155).
But the primary value of saved up bottles of vodka is not in the fact of
their drinking but in the anticipation of it. Saving the vodka is a measure
of pining, a way of constructing time as a measure of devotion in absence,
because lovers are constantly separated by one thing or another (Baliauri
1991: 23). The girls steal or beg vodka which they hoard and hide for
their boyfriends. They can give it to whom they please, but they are mostly
pleased to give it to their boyfriends. Saving the vodka is a sign of devotion:
‘Some girls will save up this bottle of vodka for her boyfriend even up to
a whole year. This is a sign that she remembers her boyfriend and she will
save it until her waiting comes to an end’ (Baliauri 1991: 155). Saving the
vodka is a sign of appreciation, expressing a hope that in the future she
might drink it with the boy, or she may give it to him to drink with others.
Again, his possession of vodka will index publicly the private devotion of
some girl, because he has no other way of acquiring it. But if her hopes are
dashed, if she will not see him again, then she will save it no longer, but
consume it with others. But, as noted, she consumes it with girls instead:
she cannot consume it with a boy because then it would no longer count as
having been saved for her boyfriend (Baliauri 1991: 155).
Khevsur love is somewhat one sided in expression. As we will see, girls
acquire and save vodka for boys much as they compose love and praise
poetry for boys. In both cases, the saving of vodka and the composition
of love poetry, girls are active producers, and boys are passive consumers,
in a manner that parallels the way that the girl must come to the boy at
night among the Khevsurs (Gogochuri 1974: 114). The Khevsur romantic
economy of stolen vodka and love poetry are all of a piece.
Lying down and getting up:
Intimacy and secrecy
The non-romantic sworn-sibling version of dzmobiloba is an open and
publicly recognized relationship, the opposite-sex romantic ‘boyfriend–
girlfriend’ version is furtive and secretive. Thus, to understand local notions
of intimacy is to understand local notions of publicity by opposition.
A ritual of sworn brotherhood ritual must be witnessed to be effective,
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 185
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 185
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
186
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
and every aspect of the relationship, the visits, the gifts, are all publicly
acknowledged. By contrast, romance ( sts’orproba ) is constituted secretly,
without witnesses, and is banned from many shrine rituals entirely, and
cannot even be mentioned at the representative meetings of the men, the
jari , that takes place at these rituals (Makalatia 1998 [1925]: 11). While
these boyfriend–girlfriend relationships are not completely secret, they are
generally tolerated, but largely with a blind eye from the older, married,
generation, they cannot be expressed in forms or forums that Khevsurs
would call ‘public’.
Among the Khevsurs, one of the rules of romantic practice is that the
girl must go to the boy at night (the Khevsurs are scandalized that among
the neighbouring Pshavs, boys go to the girls). The arrangements for their
meetings represent a highly developed indigenous form of spy game. Their
tryst is arranged by a mediator ( elchi , literally ‘ambassador’), generally a
girl, who fi rst asks the girl which boy she would like to spend the night
with (if either the girl or the boy is a stranger in town, she does not ask, she
simply decides herself). The ambassador then gets consent from this boy to
come as a guest to his house, saying something veiled like ‘I will be your
guest tonight. Do you have guests or not, if so, how many. I want them to be
few in number’ (Baliauri 1991: 11–12). From this the boy will understand
her intent, but in turn will want to know who she intends to bring to spend
the night, which the ambassador will stubbornly resist, a conversation like
so ensues until the boy concedes (Baliauri 1991: 12):
Boy:
Taimekel, what in the world do you intend?
Girl [Ambassador]: What do I intend, man? First tell me, will you be
in, or not. Or did someone tell you? Don’t hide
anything from me!
Boy:
Oooh I understand, I understand, Tamo, fi rst
tell me, who do you have as a guest [for me]? Is
she a fellow villager or a fellow member of the
community?
Girl:
Who should I have as a guest? Man, it’s not your
affair, who I have, fi rst tell me, what I asked you
and then I will tell you.
Boy:
I won’t tell you, Tamo, no.
Girl:
Boy, don’t hide your mind from me. Say, will you
be in or not?
Boy:
I won’t say anything until I fi nd out, who you are
talking about.
And so it goes, when the boy concedes, the ambassador will determine
with precision where the boy is sleeping, who is sleeping nearby, and then
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 186
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 186
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
VODKA
187
they will agree on a sign to announced the arrival of the ambassador and
girl, whether to imitate the voice of some animal, or throw pebbles, or
whatever. All this to ensure the girl is not tragically placed by mistake with
some other man (Baliauri 1991: 13). The ambassador will then return to
the girl’s house, and invent some pretext to tell the girl’s parents for why the
girl must spend the night at the ambassador’s house (Baliauri 1991: 13). She
will take the girl to her own house, and then, when everyone there is asleep,
they will slink out in turn to make for the boy’s house (Baliauri 1991: 13).
Later, when the boy and the girl advance from being mere sts’orperis (this
term is used for more casual dalliances) to ‘knowing’ one another (not in
the biblical sense), and eventually perhaps dzmobilis (‘sworn’ boyfriend–
girlfriends), they can dispense with the services of the ambassador (Baliauri
1991: 16).
Secrecy as a kind of privacy is part of a way in which this relationship
is constantly denied, placed in check, refused (Tuite 2000). Separation is
felt to be desirable, because it places desire in check (Kiknadze 1991) and
causes desire, frustrated, to grow (Baliauri 1991: 23). One cannot lie with
one’s lover at all times, there are occasions where it is forbidden, where
it is simply impossible. Lovers can never stay united, love is constantly
unrequited, all winter long the lovers compose poems, for there is nothing
else to do (Gogochuri 1974: 30–1). And the occasions for performing these
poems of love are often precisely those times at the end of the evening when
lovers will steal off in order to lie down together. The practices of romance
( sts’orproba ), spending the night together, ‘lying down and getting up’, and
the poetry it inspires and which describes it, are tied to many of the same
occasions:
In Khevsureti not one incident would end, if at the end of it sts’orproba
was not arranged, aside from those times, when someone died and they
came to mourn him. In other such minor events the young men and
women would gather more for the sake and purpose of sts’orproba . . . .
(Ochiauri 1980: 231)
Occasions for love and the contexts for performance of love poetry are
more or less the same, just as are the contexts where both are forbidden.
What then are these contexts like, other than the fact that they all seem to
involve drinking vodka, how does love and love poetry fi nd its occasion?
Sung, recited and whispered poems
Khevsur cosmology is based on a pervasive gender dualism which manifests
itself nearly everywhere. According to some myths, God and the Devil are
brother and sister. The shrine divinities which represent the community are
imagined as being men, and linked to each shrine are female principles,
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 187
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 187
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:13 AM
188
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
called dobili (‘sworn sister’), who are conceived of as being semi-demonic
powers allied to the masculine principle of the shrine by the same kind of
relationship as a romantic version of dzmobiloba (shrine divinities do not
marry!), with their own cult buildings and objects. Within human community
itself, the same gender dualism applies, but there it is mediated both by
the non-reproductive forms of sexuality of the divine world ( sts’orproba )
as well as the reproductive sexuality of marriage and kinship. While all
humans are impure, ‘fl eshy’ ( xorcieli ), men are ‘purer’ than women. Men
are by nature closer to the masculine principle of the shrine than women
are (they ‘have a part of’ the divine nature, nats’iliani ), while women are in
general ‘mixed’ or ‘impure’ ( mireuli ) (Tuite and Bukhrashvili 1999, Tuite
2002), particularly when they are undergoing menstruation or childbirth,
when they are considered to be particularly impure to the men (in fact, to
all men but their dzmobili, who is unaffected by this impurity) and must
be separated from the community in menstrual and birthing huts. Men are
regarded as ‘servants’ or ‘serfs’ ( qma ‘servant, serf’) of these otherworldly
‘lords’, and the Khevsurs distinguish between ‘good servants’, heroic men
who are apt to die in battle if they haven’t already, and ‘bad servants’,
effeminate ladies’ men who are apt to be found lying with a woman:
The good serf will die in battle, settling scores,
The bad one – at the doors of the stable, bedding down with women.
(Kiknadze 1997: 200; text from Shanidze 1931: 013)
This gender dualism is particularly extreme in the system of poetic genres
and their contexts for performance. First of all there is the opposition
in native terms between serious epic poems (
simghere ‘song’) about
dead heroes and lyric poems called leksi or shairi (Gogochuri 1974: 10),
which, unlike epic ‘songs’ can be about contemporary living people, and
can involve blame as well as praise, humour as well as serious themes.
Poems about love, also called ‘girl and boy’ poems, fall into the leksi-shairi
class. This opposition of genres is a gendered opposition both in terms of
thematic content, composition and performance. The genre of simghere is
exclusively part of the male repertoire, while leksi-shairi poems of love and
insult form the core of the female repertoire; consequently simghere are
associated with a masculine performance style, called, mghera ‘singing’,
often with a kind of guitar called a panduri , while the other forms can be
sung either in this style or in the style called leksoba (‘reciting’) with the
masculine guitar-like instrument ( panduri ) or the feminine instrument, the
accordion ( garmoni, buzik’a ); lastly, the simghere belongs at the centre of
male ritual publics ( jari ), where talk of women or women themselves are
equally forbidden, where the core elements of the feminine repertoire ( leksi-
shairi , love poems, accordions) are forbidden, the feminine repertoire fi nds
its indigenous public in gatherings of young people called the axaluxali .
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 188
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 188
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
VODKA
189
Women praise living men in ‘love poetry’, and men praise dead heroes
in ‘heroic songs’. But what do women fi nd praiseworthy in their lovers?
Khevsur women, in general, are attracted to men who have the properties
of what Khevsurs call ‘good servants’ (heroic, gallant, brave, attractive,
self-controlled, well dressed, and apparently indifferent to girls). In fact,
the kinds of men praised in heroic songs and love poetry are pretty much
the same ‘good servants’, except that in heroic songs they are dead, and in
love poetry they are not. Khevsur men who are too openly concerned with
matters of love, who follow girls around like a ‘bad servant’, are derided as
kalachuna (‘sissy’), this is why the man must not display his love openly or
‘go to’ the girl (Baliauri 1991: 17). Men, however, in the very act of seeming
indifferent to women, concerning themselves with duelling, war, and other
heroic, serious, public matters, make themselves attractive in the eyes of
women. Indeed, men deliberately seek out duels (‘good servant’ behaviour)
secretly not merely because of matters of love (jealousy, betrayal), but also
in order to attract a lover (‘bad servant’ behaviour). Khevsur love seems as
one sided as Khevsur love poetry, but this would seriously underestimate
the role matters of romance play for men.
While many kinds of Khevsur poems actually have the identity of the
author ( matkvami , the ‘speaker’ of the poem) written directly into the song
or poem, anonymity is particularly characteristic of poetry by women, and
especially love poetry. Love poetry, or rather, poetry praising the lover,
is largely something limited to women, and women’s occasions of public
performance of poetry is limited too to less consequential side venues
like the axaluxali (the gathering of the young people), and not the more
consequential venues like the jari (the gathering of the older men). Public
performance of poetry was considered shameful for women, but women
were free to compose poetry and recite it, but not ‘publicly’ (Gogolauri
1996: 5–8). Such poetry circulated widely but also anonymously: little is
known of the authors and their addressees, except in those cases where a
woman publicly reclaimed her poetry as she grew older (Gogolauri 1996:
6, Gogochuri 1974: 94). Not only the author, but also the addressee, of love
poetry, is concealed, the addressee frequently given a specifi c nickname in
the poem that only the boy and girl concerned would know (Gogochuri
1974: 93). One of the most powerful motivations for women to compose
anonymously is because of both the serious consequences of insulting
[ saseno ] poetry as well as the love poetry of praise.
The occasions for the performance of these genres, and genres of
performance associated with them, in turn serve to divide the social universe
into two spheres, what we might call with caution ‘indigenous public’ of
the jari and ‘indigenous private’ (or even a ‘counterpublic’ (Warner 2002))
of the axaluxali . The occasions most appropriate for the performance of
heroic songs are found in the jari , a term denoting the older members of the
community, especially the men, whose opinions matter and who are collected
together to discuss matters defi ned as being important to the community as
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 189
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 189
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
190
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
a whole, ‘public’ matters, you might say. The term jari not only includes the
Habermasian sense of ‘representative publicity’ ( jari literally means ‘army’,
the portion of the community that represents the whole in ritual or in
battle), but it can also mean the public before whom a performance occurs
(as in a theatrical audience). As Gogochuri notes (1974: 49), Khevsurs are
particularly fond of performing poetry (of any genre whatsoever) for their
own entertainment, so much so that they have a word for such performance
without a public, called sak’utreuli (‘for oneself’). The opposite mode of
performance, one with a public, is called jarze (‘before the jari ’). So the term
jari in some sense means ‘assembly, people, public’ (in modern Georgian
sajaro means ‘public’). Thus any performance is classifi ed as to whether or
not the performance is ‘public’ or ‘private’. But different Khevsur rituals
might have different kinds of ‘publics’ at which different participants are
present and different repertoires are performed. The key opposition here is
between the jari (the assembly of the older men, connected with the shrine)
and the axaluxali (the gathering of the young people).
At the jari certain kinds of poetry, particularly those performed as songs
dealing with heroic or mythological themes, are performed. Banned from
the jari are ‘girl-boy’ ( sakalvazho ) poems as they are called, or, indeed,
any talk about women at all (Ochiauri 2005: 37–8). The thematics of these
shrine events are as masculine as the public, women do not take part in
them as topic or as participant (Gogochuri 1974: 51–2). At some such
rituals even the ‘feminine’ accordion ( garmoni, ‘buzik’a ’) is not allowed,
only instruments like the ‘masculine’ panduri that are appropriate for
heroic songs are permitted.
Every ritual event produces a jari , but the axaluxali , or gathering of
young people, may or may not be permitted depending on the nature of the
larger event. Some extremely grave shrine events do not have an axaluxali ,
at others it exists at the sufferance of the more offi cial gathering of older
people, the jari , but at weddings there is always one (Gogochuri 1974: 53).
At the axaluxali all performance genres are possible, like the wedding, the
atmosphere here is completely the opposite of the sombre atmosphere of
the jari : ‘The axaluxali context is the most free and the least restrained,
because elders do not take part in it’ (Gogochuri 1974: 54). Each of these
events are events of drinking, though beer dominates as the drink of the
jari , and vodka dominates as the drink of the axaluxali , and so too they are
characterized by kinds of poetry, heroic songs sung to the panduri among
the older men of the jari , lyric poetry sung to the accordion among the boys
and girls in the axaluxali .
The axaluxali was the only venue where boys and girls, love poetry and
drinking vodka were all found together. And one thing that love, vodka
and poetry all have in common is that they can cause fi ghts, and fi ghts
were common at the axaluxali (Ochiauri 1991: 162). And, indeed, many
of the lower forms of poetry are designed for precisely this purpose, to
incite confl ict, especially among the axaluxali . Heroic songs, which only
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 190
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 190
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
VODKA
191
allow praise of people long dead, emphasize solidarity, unity and amity
as well, whereas poems, which can only be performed at the axaluxali ,
include subgenres emphasizing joking or insults of living people, which
are designed to produce physical confl ict. In this extremely misogynistic
imaginary, extremely divisive events like the jari , where women cannot
participate, where the dead are praised, are also events where they talk
about strife, confl ict and reconciliation (movement from confl ict to amity),
whereas inclusive events like the axaluxali , in which women play a major
role, are places where (it is imagined) discord is seeded by insult poetry and
confl icts begin (Ochiauri 1980: 125):
Some would recite joking poems, some would recite about imprisonment,
army life, and occasionally insult poems (if there were here such young
men and women, who came angry with each other). A fi ght frequently
would follow insult poems. If a boy offended a girl in some way with
a poem or by saying something else, young men close to her would not
tolerate this and the matter could end in a fi ght with short swords. Out
of fear of this women frequently hid their annoyance, they would not
disclose the fact to their male friends and relatives. Often such an enmity
would happen, that one lineage would be incited against another lineage
over women. This was very shameful. (Ochiauri 1980: 30)
The consequences, then, of insult poems, were potentially quite severe. As
a result, not only were such poems composed anonymously, but they are
circulated out of the limelight even in the axaluxali , in whispered asides, like
the relationships that provoke them. Such a ‘whispered’ performance mode
forms a third, unoffi cial mode of performance opposed to both the ‘public’
styles of performance of ‘song’ ( mghera ) and ‘recitation’ ( leksoba ) and the
‘public’ contexts of the jari and axaluxali . The whispered circulation of
anonymous insult poems would elicit more insult poems in turn:
In spite of this, boys and girls would not let it rest and would tell each
other insult poems on the sly. When they would say (such a) poem, they
would conceal their own identity ( vinaoba ) and often the poet ( melekse )
would completely hide to whom the poem was addressed and even the
teller [the person relaying the poem] did not know, they too would say
their own reply poem in such a way that [someone] would not know who
they were talking about. Insult poems said about women annoyed all the
women, if they recited it in an axaluxali . Insult poems by women also
annoyed all the boys (young men), and they too would without fail reply
with an insult poem. (Ochiauri 1980: 30)
Naturally, after an insult poem is recited, insulted parties began to seek
out the identity of the poet, and sometimes someone else, irritable for some
reason, would reveal the identity and motive of the author, which could,
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 191
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 191
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
192
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
in turn, lead to a fi ght with short swords. Here poetry, which caused the
confl ict, might also ameliorate it, as someone else might then pick up the
panduri and recite a poem whose purpose was to entertain and make those
present forget their foul mood and wash the taste of confl ict from their
minds (Ochiauri 1980: 31).
If, however, men decided to fi ght on matters related to women and
poetry, then here, too, women played a decisive role in restraining the men.
Women would run and take hold of men who intended to fi ght, and a man
so held could not free himself from the woman who held him without great
shame (Ochiauri 1980: 31). Finally, if women were few, and men many, this
method would not work. Here a single woman could take off her headscarf
( mandeli ) and throw it on the ground between the men. Out of respect for
the headscarf and the gesture, men were expected to restrain themselves
from fi ghting (Ochiauri 1980: 32). In such cases, depending on how far
the fi ght had gone and its relative seriousness, amity could not be restored
between the combatants without some ritual gesture of reconciliation, in
extreme cases, being forced to swear brotherhood by drinking vodka mixed
with fl ecks of silver. Drinking vodka, which leads to poetry and fi ghting,
can also be the means of reconciliation between fi ghters.
Circulatory signs: Vodka and beer
As I emphasized above, there are strong similarities between the ‘public’
non-romantic relation of dzmobiloba , and the ‘private’ romantic one
between a boy and a girl in terms of content. What about form? The term
dzmobili operates in two very different spheres (public/secret, homosocial
friendship/heterosexual romance), and is constituted by an act of drinking
in both. But the act of drinking that forms a ‘public’ dobil-dzmobili sworn-
sibling relationship takes the form of a public ritual called the ‘oath of
silver’ (it involves drinking a drink into which fl akes of silver have been
introduced), it must also be witnessed by members of the jari . Usually, the
drink is vodka, but sometimes, beer is drunk, other times, any old drink will
do, as long as silver is present in the drink. In addition, stronger forms of
the relationship can be formed by replacing silver with the bodily substance
of the participants’ blood. The symbolism of blood in establishing ritual
kinship is obvious, the symbolism of silver fl akes in the drink is harder to
understand: Silver is a sacred substance, non-ornamental objects of silver
(cups, bowls) cannot be owned by humans, since they form the sacred
treasure of the otherworldly shrine lords. The treasure of the otherworldly
shrine lord also includes the men (‘serfs’) of the shrine, whom this divinity
refers to as ‘silver buttons’ in its divine language (Ochiauri 1954: 130–1).
The use of silver, the sacred metal, in the drinks then consecrates the oath
with the sacred ‘publicness’ of the shrine, the jari .
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 192
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 192
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
VODKA
193
The ‘boyfriend–girlfriend’ relationship, by contrast, has none of these
features. There are no witnesses, the only drink possible in this relationship
is vodka, and there is no silver mixed in the drink. The vodka the girl brings
the boy hovers between comparison with the vodka drunk in the ritual
performative act of constituting a public dzmobili relationship and the
gifted vodka of the sadzmobilo gift that the travelling party (the girl) brings
to the stationary one (the boy) that sustains the relationship thereafter.
While vodka is an important medium of public ritual action, vodka is
not in itself a sacred, ritual drink, unlike beer. Like the sacred silver cups
from which it is drunk, beer is diagnostic of the masculine universe of
ritual publicity, the jari . Beer is not only a part of ritual consumption, but
from start to fi nish beer is associated with ritual. While vodka is frequently
a respectable participant in the world of ritual, there are some especially
grave rituals of reconciliation (usually after a death in duelling) that can
only be mediated with beer, and never with vodka, precisely because ‘vodka
is the drink of devils’ (Khizanishvili 1940: 65).
Here the folk semiotic ideology of the Khevsurs between ‘ritual’ and
‘everyday’ substances seems to replicate an inherited Durkheimian analytic
opposition within the social anthropology of ritual that strongly opposes
technical activities to ritual or symbolic activities (Barth 1960, Peters
1984, Asad 1988, Pfaffenberger 1992). This is because, as Asad points
out (1988), our commonly held notion of ritual tends to oppose ritual as
symbolic behaviour to technical or practical behaviour. Indeed, in social
anthropology, the fact that one could not understand the technical function
of a given behaviour was often the basis for claiming it to be ritual (Barth
1960, Peters 1984).
Initially, the Khevsur semiotic ideology seems to make parallel
distinctions: the qualities that are relevant for the social evaluation and
circulation of beer are primarily ‘ritual’ ones, categories of ‘purity’ which
the beer gains by being made under specifi c ritual conditions within a sacred
precinct, and which it retains or loses depending on whether it comes into
contact with impure things in its subsequent circulation. While beer also
has recognizable technical or sensuous properties independent of its ritual
or discursive property of purity, these have no relevance for its circulation.
Vodka, by contrast, has no ritual dimension of production, the source is
completely irrelevant, and is evaluated entirely in terms of its technical or
sensuous properties. Hence, beer is a sacred, ritual drink and vodka is not.
But if we stand back and look at the overall circulatory patterns of beer
and vodka as a whole, the materiality of these two kinds of circulatory
objects comes to the fore. The differing material or sensuous properties of
beer and vodka produce very different ‘affordances’ for their circulation.
The properties of the objects themselves become indexes and icons of their
respective potential spheres of circulation. Indexes, because these properties
really do causally permit different actual topographies or spacetimes of
circulation (for ‘spacetimes’ see Munn 1986). Icons, because the properties
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 193
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 193
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:14 AM
194
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
of the object are a microcosm of the circulatory macrocosm they mediate:
beer is not durable or very portable, and thus has limited potential
circulatory spacetimes on top of the circumscription by the ritual order;
vodka is highly durable and portable, permitting it to go everywhere beer
does, and everywhere else too (cf. Munn 1986: 10, 60). Taken as a whole,
the aggregate circulatory careers afforded by the different properties of
these circulatory objects produce opposed images of the social world in
which they circulate.
(1) The circulation of beer tends to produce an image (an indexical
icon) of a settled community centring on the shrine and manifested
punctually at rituals, the circulation of vodka produces instead a
rhizomatic image of a rather more individualistic social network of
connections criss-crossing the boundaries of the community and
mediating relations measured temporally not in terms of punctual
localized ritual gatherings but long distances and long periods of
time.
(2) The circulation of beer does the familiar representational work of
ritual in creating palpable indexical icons of otherwise invisible
cosmological oppositions (Tambiah 1985, Silverstein 200: 203);
its circulation recapitulates the pervasive dualism of Khevsur
cosmology, separating gods from demons, men from women,
purity from impurity, the shrine complex from the chaos beyond its
boundaries. The circulation of vodka produces relations that criss-
cross these cosmological oppositions.
(3) The circulation of beer therefore performs the ‘self-grounding’ ritual
work of what Latour (1993: 10–11) calls ‘purifi cation’, of setting
up, essentializing and displaying the basic oppositions of the social
ontology in a maximally unambiguous way, while the circulation
of vodka instead produces hybrid networks which perform the
work of mediating or ‘translating’ between these purifi ed domains
established in ritual. To underline this point, I have deliberately
designed the diagrams illustrating the circulation of beer and vodka
( Figures 7.1 and 7.2) to recall the famous diagram used by Latour
(1993: 11) ( Figure 7.3 ) to illustrate the difference between the work
of purifi cation and the work of translation.
Beer: Ritual properties
The most commonly cited difference between beer and vodka among
the Khevsurs is that the former is a ‘ritual’ drink and the latter is not.
While beer shares with vodka a certain variability in terms of strength and
fl avour, the properties of beer that have effects on social trajectories are
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 194
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 194
2/21/2001 11:34:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:15 AM
VODKA
195
GODS
PURE
Shrine
HUMANS
A
Village
B
DEMONS
IMPURE
Menstrual Huts
Figure 7.1 Beer circulation and the ritual work of purifi cation: Trajectories of
sacred beer (A) and household beer (B) in relation to relative purity of village
spaces
GIRL VODKA
Road
ROAD VODKA
Shrine
Other Villages
Village
GOING WITH VODKA
VISITING VODKA
Menstrual Huts
Figures 7.2 Vodka circulation and the sociable work of translation: Rhizomatic
trajectories of vodka circulation hybridizing the ontological oppositions set up by
the ritual work of purifi cation
ritual ones, source-identifying indexicals that have cosmological reference
(e.g. indexing the purity of the maker, the barley, the equipment, the place
of production), while the properties relevant for the social trajectory of
vodka are almost entirely technical or qualitative properties of the product
itself (taste, strength), the source of vodka in terms of raw material, place
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 195
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 195
2/21/2001 11:34:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:15 AM
196
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
First Dichotomy
Non-humans
Humans
Nature
Culture
WORK OF
PURIFICATION
1
2
Second Dichotomy
WORK OF
TRANSLATION
3
Hybrids
Networks
Figure 7.3 Purifi cation and translation: Adaptation of Figure 1.1 from Latour
(1993: 11)
or personnel of production has no relevance. From the beginning to the end
of the circulatory career, different kinds of beer are carefully distinguished
with respect to their source and their ultimate goal, and each stage of the
circulation of beer has its own ritual attendants. The whole circulation
process of beer is one long ritual process from production to consumption.
Hence, the source of the grain used in beer is from fi elds that belong to the
god (sacrifi ced to the shrine), that this grain has been threshed by the shrine
offi ciants who make the beer on a special threshing fl oor that belongs to
the shrine, and is stored in the shrine complex in a sacred granary, then
brewed into beer in cauldrons in a special hut ( salude ), also part of the
shrine complex, and fi nally moved to the point of consumption by special
ritual attendants. All these actors, objects and places share with the beer
itself the property of ‘ritual purity’. The quality of ‘purity’ thus applies to a
series of different domains, it is a property of persons, places and things.
But how does one know one is drinking shrine beer? After all, shrine beer
has the same range of sensuous qualities as normal beer: it may be strong
or weak, good or bad tasting, but the differentiating property of ‘ritual
purity’ is non-qualitative, it is not one that can be inferred from sensory
experience. The sensuous qualities of beer are available to anyone with
taste buds, but the ritual qualities (indexing the purity of the source) are
constituted discursively, by a chain of authentication from the ritual experts
to the lay consumers. Moreover, unlike some of the other source-identifying
indexicals discussed in earlier chapters, the quality of ritual purity is not
something established once and for all, beer, like anything else, can become
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 196
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 196
2/21/2001 11:34:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:15 AM
VODKA
197
impure by contact with impure persons or spaces. Therefore, it is all the more
important that the circulation of the beer from production to consumption
be carefully monitored and regimented: the beer is constantly attended by
shrine attendants, and the purity of the beer can be inferred from the purity
of the spaces it is allowed to traverse or avoid and the purity of the persons
who make it, carry it, drink it or do not drink it, acting in effect as a living
chain of authentication attesting to, and protecting , the purity of the beer.
The ritual purity of beer has powerful consequences for its circulation.
The same living chain of authentication that attests to the purity of the
beer by authenticating its indexical linkages backwards to its source also
serves to monitor and police its subsequent circulation to ensure that this
pure beer does not enter impure spaces of the community such as the
menstruation huts of women. Shrine beer is designed for special communal
festivals related to the shrine, whereas other beers are brewed for certain
individual family rituals, for example, weddings and funerals. Shrine beer
is different from ordinary beer in that not only is it in itself purer than
ordinary beer, but like shrine attendants, shrine beer itself must ‘avoid
impurity’, specifi cally women who are in a state of impurity. Just as impure
women must avoid spaces associated with ritual purity, so pure men and
their products, sacred beer, must avoid spaces associated with feminine
ritual impurity. Even the same substance, beer, can be distinguished into
two varieties, the sacred ‘public’ beer of the shrine versus the more ordinary
‘private’ beer of a wedding, by their possible trajectories, sacred beer can
never enter impure space, while wedding beer can:
[For a woman who is in a state of impurity] the ‘cross’ [shrine divinity]
forbids passing through the fi elds of the cross and other places considered
to be pure. . . . At the time of a holy day they could not bring shrine
[ sajvaro ] beer into the samrelo [menstruation hut], for the taking of a
shrine offering into an impure place was not allowed. However, they
would take beer from a wedding or other such drinking occasions into a
menstruation hut. This meant a great estimation of the visiting woman.
(Ochiauri 1980: 244–5)
Beer: Technical properties
But whatever its ritually regulated properties, beer is still beer and making
shrine beer and family beer (brewed in individual households) has certain
things in common in a technical sense. While ritual purity of shrine beer
is registered in digital terms (i.e. beer is either shrine beer or it is not),
the other technical qualities of beer are registered in terms of analogue,
probabilistic outcomes. Khevsurs know, for example, that some people
make better beer than other people, although in principle this is not a
condition for becoming a beer maker the way that ritual purifi cation is, or
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 197
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 197
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
198
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
that sometimes it comes out better, sometimes worse, or that making beer
in the winter is intrinsically harder, requiring different techniques to ensure
fermentation (Ochiauri 2005: 21). They also are aware that, for example,
there is a technical basis for beer production distinct from the matter of
purifi cation or nature of the maker, that beer involves processes involving
interactions of grain, water and yeast, and that hops, which need to be
acquired from the plains (Ochiauri 2005: 83), are essential as well for good
beer. That they identify this mixture of grain, yeast and hops, as a quasi-
natural substrate of beer production is indicated by a little poem which
attributes the invention of beer to a little bird, who brews beer accidentally
in its stomach, puffs up and gets drunk. As Tinatin Ochiauri, herself a
Khevsur and noted ethnographer of the Khevsurs, retold me the story in
an interview:
[Khevsur] tradition ascribes the invention of beer to a bird:
. . .
The bird said: I ate some grain,
I followed it with hops, I got drunk,
I was a little tiny thing,
I became the size of a pig!
The bird got drunk. The Khevsurs wondered at the little drunken bird
and started to brew beer themselves.
The basic technical (natural) properties of beer, as opposed to the ritual
(conventional) ones, seem to be brought together as those that could
happen by accident in the belly of a bird. Hence, as a ritual drink, some
aspects of beer production attend more to its ritual qualisigns, others
seem more directed to technical qualisigns like taste. For example, at one
Khevsur ritual (Kriste) the offi cial shrine beer makers seem engaged in
primarily technical activity, a techne or craft which is the probabilistic
outcome of a number of factors, including equipment, hops and technique.
For example, if good beer is needed, they add more hops and brew it
longer,
If they are not assiduous about making good beer, then they cut down
on the hops, nor do they boil it down as much. They make a thin beer. It
depends on the k’odi (wooden fermentation vat) too, in some k’odis good
beer comes out, and in some not. (Ochiauri 2005: 21)
But the salient point is that while the ritual properties of beer can be
absolutely controlled, the technical properties cannot. The former are
conventionally meaningful, the latter are not, sacred beer is still sacred
beer, whether it is good or bad, strong or thin.
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 198
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 198
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
VODKA
199
Vodka
By contrast with beer, vodka is almost completely indifferent to its source.
Vodka is made by women at the house (i.e. in wholly impure conditions)
from almost anything (the ingredients are not pure either), can be described
almost entirely as a technical process with discernable probabilistic outcomes
in terms of quality. Vodka is evaluated almost entirely in technical and
material terms of its sensuous properties, hence, the production of vodka is
meaningful insofar as it affects these qualities.
The quality of vodka, like beer, is variable, but much more subject to
chance outcomes than beer (where, as noted above, the quality of beer
can be controlled by hops and boiling): ‘Vodka is haphazard: sometimes it
comes out well, sometimes it is spoiled. No one knows why’ (Goch’oridze
1993: 174–5). Vodka is brewed in a series of distillations each of which is
weaker than the last, each distillation is kept separate from each other, the
fi nal fourth distillation and after being called shamani (Goch’oridze 1993:
174). Some of the variation in the fi nal product can be controlled by mixing
distillations of different strengths. Normally the fi rst three distillations are
mixed together, the fourth, shamani , if it comes out well, is also mixed
in, to produce a medium-strength vodka in larger quantities (Goch’oridze
1993: 174–5). However, if stronger or weaker vodka is desired, the mixture
of varying distillations can control the resulting strength for the desired
purpose (Ochiauri 1980: 6–7).
This controlled variability allows material differences in vodka to
be expressive of social differences (girls, for example, only steal
good
vodka). The evaluation of gifted vodka is, in general, a topic of animated
conversation. The host praises the strength of the guest’s vodka, comparing
it to fi re, while the guest disparages their own vodka (Ochiauri 1980: 16).
Vodka which is brought as a gift is fi rst tasted, and then, if from its taste
it appears that it is strong enough, its strength is displayed to others by
sprinkling it on the fi re or by pouring in on a blade, and lighting it. If,
however, the vodka’s taste indicates that it is closer to being shamani (weak,
watery vodka), then its non-fl ammability is not displayed to others, so that
the person bringing it not be shamed (Ochiauri 1980: 7).
The difference in quality of vodka is an almost accidental by-product
of production, but because it can be partially controlled by mixture of
distillations, it can in turn be revalorized in meaningful ways in exchange.
An example of this exploitation of the variable properties of vodka is the
practice of visiting and bringing gifts of ‘visiting ( mosanaxavi ) vodka’ to
a family that has recently added a new member to the family. If a boy is
born, the visitors will prepare more and better vodka, and a larger and
wider set of relations will do so, than if a girl is born (Ochiauri 1980: 6–7).
Following the pervasive and open Khevsur prospensity towards misogyny,
in the case of the birth of a girl, the scope of vodka production was smaller
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 199
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 199
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
200
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
on all levels, matching the other dimensions in which the birth of a girl
differs from the birth of a boy:
The visiting vodka for a boy had to be very good vodka, but in the
visiting vodka of a girl no one was interested whether the vodka was
good or not, they would say: ‘I’m not bringing visiting vodka for a boy,
am I? Why do I want good vodka, let them give birth to a boy and then
I’ll bring good vodka.’ (Ochiauri 1980: 35)
Such planned differences in the quality of the vodka are directly expressive
of the relative rank of boys and girls within the community as desirable
additions to the family. But even bad vodka has a social value. Travellers
visiting friends and relatives would bring with them both good vodka and
a quantity of a lower grade of ‘road vodka’, a low-grade vodka closer to
shamani , to be doled out to people they meet along the road and to ‘protect’
their reserves of good vodka from the mouths of chance encounters
(Ochiauri 1980: 7).
Purity and strangers: The circulatory horizons of
beer and vodka
So far, there is a neat opposition: the evaluation and circulation of beer
are determined by its ritual (discursive) properties, and the technical
(sensuous) properties are irrelevant, while the evaluation and circulation
of vodka are entirely determined by its technical (sensuous) properties,
insofar as these can be controlled. According to this semiotic story, both
objects are bundles of qualisigns, properties that serve as potentials for
meaning, but only those qualisigns that have been conventionally invested
with social meaning are relevant in cultural terms, the remaining qualities
are consigned to what Peirce calls the ‘material qualities’ of the object,
meaning those qualities that the object has that are a matter of indifference
to its status as a sign: the word ‘man’ written in chalk on slate, in ink on
paper, are mere material qualities. Properties like strength and taste are
meaningless ‘material qualities’ of shrine beer and semiotic properties of
vodka, according to such an analysis. The limiting case for beer is when
it is so bad tasting it cannot serve as a semiotic vehicle at all, because
no one can drink it. But the material properties of these two drinks are
not merely interesting insofar as they make possible arbitrary difference ,
differences which can be arbitrarily invested with meanings, these
material qualities have causal consequences for how the two beverages
can circulate, beyond the fact that they are meaningfully different. Here
I will be attending to how all beer differs materially from all vodka, and
not be specifi cally interested in how different beers or vodkas can be
consequentially differentiated from each other. What we are interested
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 200
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 200
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
VODKA
201
in is the ‘affordances’ offered by each kind of drink in general and what
circulatory and indexical effects and general associations arise from these
different affordances.
Mountain beer is ‘black, thick, sweet, and ought to have a little taste
of hops’ (Goch’oridze 1993: 171). A Georgian friend of mine likened it to
‘sweetened motor oil’, when I fi rst drank it, it gave me a pounding headache
and prolonged fi t of vomiting. It doesn’t keep long, either. It will last only
ten days, and that thereafter it will become sour (Goch’oridze 1993: 171).
One important property of beer, then, is that it doesn’t last for a very long
time, and fairly large quantities of it will be needed to produce a general
state of inebriation in a given population.
Unlike beer, vodka will keep indefi nitely, and smaller quantities of
vodka will serve more people than beer, which must be in large quantities
which will not keep very long. In nearby Pankisi Gorge, for example, where
vodka has completely replaced beer as the ritual drink, each mountain
shrine will have a small collection of bottles of locally produced vodka
that are stored there for an indefi nite period awaiting the day of ritual
observances. Therefore, vodka, when compared to beer, therefore has two
basic properties that we will see are very important causally in terms of
what possible trajectories it can have in social space: its high relative alcohol
content gives it a high portability (hence there is ‘going with vodka’, ‘road
vodka’ and ‘visiting vodka’, but no ‘going with beer’, ‘road beer’ or ‘visiting
beer’), and this factor combined with being storable in small glass bottles
also allows it not only high mobility in space, but also high durability:
vodka is unlike beer in that it can easily travel over long distances or be
stored for a long time.
Beer is prepared and drunk within the community, while vodka (thanks
in part to the omnipresent glass bottles ( mina(i) ) that are closely associated
with vodka) is the most mobile of all drinks, even going out on the road to
meet strangers. Partly this has to do with the sorts of occasions for which
beer and vodka are brewed, beer is brewed only for ritual events that revolve
around the community shrine, and for weddings and funerals by the hosts
(and not the guests). Vodka is brewed for all of these occasions as well
as virtually every other occasion that involves sociability, by both hosts
(stationary parties) and guests (parties in motion). Because vodka, unlike
beer, is highly portable, it is the only drink that can express long-distance
relationships, relationships between members of different communities,
while beer cannot easily be carried over distances, it expresses relations
between people of the same community. Vodka is associated with people
in motion, visitors, guests, community members visiting the shrine, people
travelling on the road on their way to other villages, beer is associated with
the stationary party, hosts, shrine offi ciants. Vodka also does not spoil, it
can be carried over very long distances for long periods, or stored for long
periods of time, but beer spoils quickly, it must be drunk very soon after it
is prepared.
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 201
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 201
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
202
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Vodka and beer then take on very generally the opposed properties
of persons and places with which they are associated, bringing beer and
vodka into opposition on the basis of very general associations. By virtue
of the different locus of production (shrine, home), different producers
(men, women), different materials (pure shrine materials vs everyday),
the two drinks take on opposed social trajectories. In general, beer moves
centrifugally, from the ritual centre of the community towards its outer
edges, from the home of the wedding or funeral host to the community, and
vodka moves centripetally, from the homes towards the shrine complexes,
and also circumferentially between households, persons and centrifugally
beyond the community.
The technical dimension of production is relevant here too. As Tinatin
Ochiauri noted in an interview, beer production as a technical process
requires collective labour, and its consumption is also collective, beer and
collective ritual are synonymous; in much the same way, the production
of vodka is a matter of individual households, but the ends and social
occasions to which it is put by households are as socially general (if not
always collective) as the variety of materials from which it is made:
Beer is the ritual [ sak’ult’o ] drink, a holy [ ts’minda ] drink. It demands
great labour-consuming work. For that reason the rules of its preparation
are collective. Its use too is collective in the same way. At the time of a
gathering of a lot of people, either a holiday, a wedding or a funeral,
which are associated with a large number of people, then they prepare
beer. They are always preparing vodka. My mother was always brewing
vodka. From elderberries, crabapples, fruit, from grain, they made vodka
from everything. In the family they always needed vodka, for guests,
other things. (Tinatin Ochiauri interview 2005)
Unlike beer, the preparation of vodka is a matter of individual households,
it can be made of most anything by most anyone, and the functions to
which vodka is are far more general than beer, if beer represents the social
as an undifferentiated collectivity, vodka mediates it as a complex internally
differentiated aggregate of relations between individuals. In fact, vodka is
such a general drink that Khevsurs will even make their horses drink it,
because drunken horses amuse them. The circulation of vodka is much
like the circulation of poetry, especially anonymous love poetry: ‘A good
poem is like a bird, whence it fl ies and where it is fl ying, no one knows’
(Gogochuri 1974: 38).
The circulation of these two drinks then express different circulatory
‘spacetimes’, and the individual properties of the circulatory objects seem
to serve as miniature indexical icons of their broader spheres of circulation.
By contrast with vodka, everything about beer suggests stationary settled
community life, centred on the shrine complex, down to the large containers
in which it is brewed and carried around. Mountain ritual life probably has
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 202
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 202
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:16 AM
VODKA
203
its most obvious and central material expression in the way that part of
the shrine complex is given over to brewing beer, so that beer brewing is a
collective act, vodka the product of individual households. If the circulation
of beer from beginning to end stressed collective membership in a saqmo ,
the group of people who regard themselves as ‘serfs’ qmebi of a single
shrine, the circulation of vodka provided direct linkages between individual
households and persons within the saqmo and across the boundaries of
the saqmo . One of the many minor sacrifi ces that individual households
brought to the shrine (in return for the beer the shrine provided), vodka
also was a kind of social currency, portable, light, exchanges of vodka
amount to the very stuff of sociability. If beer is freighted with explicit
ritual signifi cance, vodka is the seen-but-unnoticed infrastructural drink,
without which social relationships could not be constituted in general:
As Baliauri puts it, ‘without vodka, . . . nothing can be done, everything
requires vodka’. Beer explicitly symbolizes an ideal Durkheimian model of
the social, vodka does the unsung day to day work of creating the social.
At fi rst glance, the opposition between the circulation of beer and vodka
recapitulates the cosmological categories of Khevsur myths ( andrezebi ).
In Khevsur mythologies, the stone shrine building which carries the same
name as the shrine deity ( jvari , khati ) and a stable cosmological centre
representing the community is created by the male shrine divinity after he
destroys and marginalizes the feminine prior inhabitants, the demons ( devi ).
The spatial organization of the community from the pure masculine centre
to the polluted feminine periphery recapitulates the basic outlines of this
cosmology (Tuite 2002, Manning 2008), as does respectively centripetal
and centrifugal, sacred and profane, rooted and rhizomatic, public and
private, circulations of beer and vodka. If the scarcely portable beer is the
‘sacred’ masculine drink, associated with the shrine divinities, it follows
that highly portable vodka, associated with strangers and roads, relations
at the periphery and exterior of the shrine community, is the feminine
‘drink of devils’.
But these opposites also attract, each dualistic cosmological opposition
is mediated by a relationship where opposites are brought back into
relationship: the work of purifi cation is complemented by the work
of translation. On one reading, vodka, like feminine demons, are the
opposite of beer and the masculine shrine lord. Their rituals, after all,
express themselves in opposite form and substance: for the shrine lord, the
sacrifi ces must be worthy (sheep or cattle), while the goats are sacrifi ced
to the dobili (Ochiauri 2005: 81); for the former, silver goblets, for the
latter, clay cups (Ochiauri 2005: 373). But just as God and the Devil are
brother and sister, the male shrine lord takes female demons ( dobili ) as his
consorts, and men and women share all these forms of relationship, and
marry too, so too vodka is paired with beer at virtually every ritual. The
opposition schematically resembles a classic marked/unmarked opposition:
on the one hand, beer and vodka are opposites; on the other hand, beer
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 203
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 203
2/21/2001 11:34:17 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:17 AM
204
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
has a severely restricted (marked) distribution, while vodka has a residual
unmarked distribution that includes places that beer cannot go, as well as
all the places it can go.
As a result, the ethnography of the Khevsurs looks very different
depending on whether it is viewed by following the circulation of beer
or the circulation of vodka. If we follow the circulation of beer, we fi nd
ourselves in a world dominated by rituals centring on the shrine complex.
Our ethnography tends to recapitulate the cosmological structure of myth
and ritual, and we are constantly drawn to public matters of the shrine and
the jari . In short, the kind of matters that nineteenth-century ethnographers
of the Khevsurs dwelt upon at length (e.g. Khizanishvili 1940). If we follow
the circulation of vodka, as I have done, we fi nd ourselves entering not only
the public sphere of the jari , but also progressively more intimate spheres
( axaluxali, sts’orproba ) absent from nineteenth-century ethnography, but
we also fi nd ourselves going beyond the community, going among strangers
on the road.
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 204
9781441160188_Ch07_Final_txt_print.indd 204
2/21/2001 11:34:17 AM
2/21/2001 11:34:17 AM
CHAPTER EIGHT
Beer
‘Aluda – Our Beer’
– Slogan for Castel-Sakartvelo’s beer Aluda
‘Kazbegi – Georgian beer’
– Slogan for Kazbegi beers
‘Natakhtari – The Georgian beer of Tomorrow’
– Slogan for Natakhtari beer
As we saw in Chapter 6 , Georgia is the homeland of wine. In fact, many
Georgians believe, and it is not an outlandish claim, that viniculture may
have originated on Georgian soil. The question I want to ask in this fi nal
chapter builds off the general association of ‘Georgia’ with ‘wine’: If
Georgia is ‘the homeland of wine’, why, under postsocialism, are Georgian
beer brand names more salient than wine brand names in public discourse
and public consumption? Why, in general, has the marketing of Georgian
beers, and not wines, become the central emblem of resurgent Georgian
national industries after socialism?
The second question addressed in this chapter builds instead off the
discussion of ‘socialist’ and ‘Western’ brands in Chapters 4–5: How have
Georgian marketers of beer responded to the infl ux of foreign brands, and
especially to a stereotypical association of the very concept of ‘brand’ to
Western (capitalist) as opposed to Georgian (socialist) goods? The problem
for marketing Georgian national beer brands is twofold. On the one hand, the
Georgian ‘national’ drink is wine, not beer. On the other hand, the concept
of brand itself under socialism seems to be ‘Western’, so that ‘domestic
brands’ of anything, let alone beer, would appear to be a contradiction in
terms. Here we will see that the idea that beer is a Georgian product plays
an important role in making a Georgian brand. Georgian brand goods
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 205
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 205
2/21/2001 11:35:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:15 AM
206
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
have a dual lineage: the idea of brand is Western, but the branding of beer
represents beer as a Georgian product (Manning and Uplisashvili 2007).
The production of beer is given in turn a ‘dual lineage’ in this branding
discourse: on the one hand, Georgian marketers emphasize the European
technological modernity of their production regimes, and on the other
hand, they often try to associate the European technological modernity
of production in one way or another the idea of ‘traditional’ ethnographic
forms of production, whether Khevsur traditions of beer making, or, in the
fi nal analysis, simply divide the moments of production, which is already
a hybrid of culture and nature, into separable parts: European technology
and Georgian raw materials.
What is particularly interesting is the way Georgian beer marketers have
domesticated and ‘traditionalized’ both ‘beer’ and ‘brand’, grounding their
domestic brands of beer in ethnographic images of the Georgian nation
inherited from socialist and pre-socialist ethnography, using ethnographic
images of Georgian tradition, particularly the ethnographic image of
Khevsur beer production and consumption discussed in
Chapter 7
to
build national brands. At the same time, while the Khevsurs serve as a
specifi c kind of image of ‘offi cial self-presentation’ of Georgian tradition,
embodying ideals of traditional masculinity that Georgian beer marketers
wish to associate with their products, ‘tradition’ can also have referents
which belong instead to a disemic register of ‘intimate self-recognition’
(for the concept of ‘disemia’ see, for example, Herzfeld 1997). As I have
argued elsewhere (Manning 2009a), if the (largely defunct) folk traditions
of the mountains represent the offi cial self-presentation of Georgia
from the socialist period onward, the traditions of the city, the intimate
urban bohemia of the intelligentsia who largely created these images
of folk traditions, serve to fi gure the opposite disemic pole of intimate
self-recognition, of (still heavily idealized) urban traditions that still
form recognizable forms of contemporary urban sociability. Georgian
representations from the nineteenth century divide Georgia between ‘the
rural people’ (whose clearest idealized example are the Khevsurs) and ‘the
urban intelligentsia’, and Georgian beer marketers also take contemporary
urban traditions of consumption, which are more experience-near,
intimate, but no less idealized, than Khevsur traditions, as a context for
traditionalizing their product. These beer commercials depict Georgian
men in traditional ‘architectures of sociability’ of the idealized urban
context, particularly balconies and courtyards that are felt to be typical
and distinctive of the Georgian urban context and which provide a basis
for beer-mediated masculine solidarities that are neither public nor private,
but neighbourly (Manning 2009a).
This chapter, then, serves as a conclusion, primarily by showing how
themes raised in each of the other chapters with regard to drink and socialist
and postsocialist politics and everyday life (Chapter 6), drink and socialist
and postsocialist categories of consumption and production, including brand
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 206
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 206
2/21/2001 11:35:15 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:15 AM
BEER
207
(Chapters 4–5), and drink in relation to Georgian ethnographic tradition
(Chapter 7), Western modernity (Chapters 3 and 5) and the nature of Georgia,
fi gured by its waters (Chapter 4). Even if these products seem to defi ne a
postsocialist period, Georgian postsocialist beers are very much products
of socialism, after all, many of the people marketing beer, and many of
those drinking it, are themselves socialist products. Looking at postsocialist
consumerism, we will see how an indigenous ontology of circulation inherited
from socialism if not before, that privileges production (‘productivism’),
identifying it as a hybrid realm between technology and nature (Chapter 5),
can be shown to inform postsocialist consumption. So, before we proceed,
let’s locate postsocialist beer drinking in general in relation to some of the
other Georgian cultures of drink we have seen so far, with a view to solving
the enigma of the success of beer marketing in the land of wine.
The semiotics of Georgian drinking culture:
An overview
First of all, why beer, and not wine? In order to understand beer marketing
in Georgia, we need to recall the fi eld of practices of consumption and
distribution in which beer is located. First of all, consumption. Wine, for
Georgians, is tied up with specifi c ritual contexts of consumption, called
supras (Chapter 6). The important thing to note is Georgian consumption,
and, indeed, notions of space and kinds of sociability more generally,
is organized into distinct spheres organized in the main by the kind of
drink (and paired foods), in which wine is the central organizing node,
so that all other drinks, especially beer, can be identifi ed by opposition
to wine. Hence, wine is a drink linked to ritual contexts of consumption,
which are obligatory, which usually are private events, even if held in
restaurants (which is not preferred), which constitute and reinforce private
social relationships, in the main, through the coupling of acts of drinking
wine with acts of speaking toasts. The ‘private’ world of socialism and
postsocialism, opposed to public life, can be viewed as a series of supras.
Beer drinking stands in a disemic relation to the supra. If the supra acts
as a ritual of ‘offi cial self-presentation’ in which the private world of the
household presents itself publicly, then beer drinking represents the intimate
pole of ‘intimate self-recognition’. Hence, while in some parts of Georgia
(i.e. Khevsureti (Chapter 7)), beer is a ritual drink at the supra, most
lowland Georgians fi nd this completely incomprehensible. For lowland-
dwelling Georgians, beer is often simply an unmarked drink (much like
vodka in the mountains) with respect to the supra, one could serve beer as
one would serve a soft drink, and if one wishes to toast one another while
drinking beer, one need only buy a bottle of vodka to serve as a liquid
powerful enough to carry the weighty sentiments of the toasting. In fact,
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 207
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 207
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
208
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
most Georgian beer drinkers will eventually do this, because the sociability
of beer seems somehow empty without adding the formal, ritual element
of recognizing these informal social relationships in toasting. Thus, while
for Khevsurs the traditional ritual drink is beer, and the less ritualized
drink is vodka, in the plains beer is the drink of sociability and vodka is
the ritual chaser. But if beer drinking can always be brought into the fold
of the supra by using vodka, beer is also the opposite of wine in toasting,
in urban contexts beer can express an ‘anti-toast’ (as we saw in Chapter
6). Similarly, I have seen many times women drinking beer at a supra as a
purely sociable drink, since their participation in the ritual aspects of wine
drinking is not required.
Turning now to more ‘public’ contexts of consumption, alongside
the ‘cultured’ sphere of socialist fast food, the tea, coffee and fl avoured
waters establishments, available to women and children (Chapter 5), was
a much more plebeian, uncultured, masculine, one, serving various kinds
of food, ranging from relatively good offerings, such as meat dumplings
called Khinkali, to indifferent socialist fare such as sausages. These
establishments were also male watering holes, defi ned by the fact that they
served (really pretty awful) beer. In the socialist period, it is doubtful that
any woman would have entered such an establishment, though nowadays,
particularly in the higher end establishments with wider menus, groups
of men, groups of women, and cross-sex gatherings can be found in
abundance. Such higher end establishments, of course, serve a wide variety
of beverages as well, beer and soft drinks alike. This is not usually the case
with the lower end, more plebeian, versions of these restaurants. What
all these establishments share, however, is their generally informal, non-
ritual oriented, atmosphere of sociable commensality, and the fact that
the emphasis is on enjoying the food, rather than treating the food as
an infrastructure for weighty matters of toasting and drinking, as at a
traditional supra. Perhaps most symbolic of this was the fact that in many
such socialist period restaurants, though not all, the tables provided were
tall, without the seats needed for a supra, so that one stood while drinking
beer (informal), and sat while drinking wine (formal). Under socialism,
if the ritual sphere is defi ned by wine and associated (but backgrounded)
festive foods in proliferation, and the cultured fast food sphere defi ned by
indigenous soft drinks and cheese bread, the plebeian masculine sphere of
socialism was defi ned by extraordinarily horrid beer (as virtually everyone
remembers it) and somewhat indifferent fast foods, all of which, however,
seemed to involve meat or fi sh, unlike Laghidze’s and such like places, in
which the offering was either cheese breads or some sort of pastry item.
The major change in Georgian urban restaurants in more recent times
is, as noted, their demotion from being scenes of supras (there are now
specialized dining halls for these ritual purposes), and the increased
emphasis on the gustatory enjoyment of the food as the most important
aspect, with beer standing by as one of many possible optional drinks.
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 208
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 208
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
BEER
209
To the extent that this has happened, to that extent these are also places
where men and women can be found.
Not only, then, did these two forms of public consumption (soft drinks
and beer) stand in opposition under socialism to the private form typifi ed
by the supra, but also to each other, standing as feminized images of
cultured consumption to masculine images of plebeian consumption: sweet
to savoury, cheese or pastry to meat, sweet soft drink to quasi-alcoholic
putrid nastiness. If Laghidze’s expresses in ideal form the desirable (latently
feminine, overt prestige) personal property of being ‘cultured’, k’ult’uruli ,
then beer expresses the desirable (latently masculine, covert prestige)
property of being
ubralo , Russian
prosto , ‘simple, without airs’. Both
are ‘egalitarian’, ‘public’ properties, but they stand opposed in a disemic
opposition of overt prestige to covert prestige in forming a distinct set of
ways of expressing a public self, only one of which is normatively open to
women, of course. Beer drinking, then, was under socialism, and remains to a
certain extent under postsocialism, stereotypically linked to plebeian public
expressions of masculine sociability. For beer marketers we interviewed,
the idea that beer was a masculine sociable drink was axiomatic, many of
them were quite surprised by my colleague Ann Uplisashvili’s observation
that women in fact drink a good deal of beer. One company in fact tried
(quite forcefully, it amounted to stalking) to hire her as a consultant after
she made this novel observation to them! I note this here because the fact of
female consumers is largely not refl ected in the advertising of beer, which
remains locked in a socialist period model of beer as a drink of masculine
sociability.
A postsocialist miracle: Contemporary
beer marketing in Georgia
There is no question, however, that beer consumption in branded form
has proliferated everywhere, eating at restaurants with beer has become a
commonplace, beer gardens with ostentatious marketing of local brands
are everywhere, and almost all beer that is consumed in urban contexts
is consumed under the aegis of some local brand name. In one of the few
economic miracles of postsocialism, in the past ten years or so Georgian
companies have cornered the domestic market on beer consumption almost
entirely. By contrast, domestic wine brands suffer not only from rampant
falsifi cation and Russian embargos, but they also suffer from the fact that
most wine that is consumed at supras is private or peasant production,
brandless wine sold in jugs, and not European style table wine. There is
no comparable phenomenon of brandless beer, at least in urban markets,
though I add parenthetically that when we talk of brands in postsocialist
Georgia, we are talking about urban consumption practices. When I asked
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 209
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 209
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
210
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
a rural Georgian man who was an avid consumer of beer what his favourite
brand was, he became uncomfortable, and replied that since he was just a
simple, ordinary (Georgian ubralo Russian prosto ) man, he did not pay
attention to such things. So when we talk about beer brands in Georgia
we are largely talking about an urban phenomenon. While beer brands
are for domestic consumption, wine brands are for the export market,
by and large. Partly this is because of price, taste, but also because wine
consumption in Georgia is driven fi rst and foremost by a quantitative
principle based on ritual practice and not a qualitative set of discourses
of distinction (Chapter 6). At a supra, one needs a minimum of one litre
of wine for each man present. Whether the wine is good or not is strictly
speaking, secondary, though certainly important. People seldom talk about
wine brands, viewing money spent on bottled branded wine as money
thrown away in an inscrutable fashion, most urban men I know are quite
avidly able to discourse about beer brands (unlike wine), and seem to enjoy
talking about the relative merits of beer brands in this way.
The important point, then, is that beer is centrally linked to expression
of informal masculine solidary sociability in contexts that are not strictly
speaking domestic. Beer consumption can take place in the courtyard or the
garden, it can take place in locations ranging from inscrutable permanently
installed tables that appear here and there in the middle of empty lots
presumably for this purpose (resembling the tables built into graveyards and
burial plots for ritual commensality with the dead), to improvised rooftop
beer gardens ( Figure 8.1 ), or it can take place on the curb, by the riverbank,
or in any abandoned spot in the cityscape. Beer is stereotypically associated
with a domain of plebeian, informal, non-ritual, non-domestic masculine
sociability: one might say it fi nds its home in any number of places, all of
which have in common only that they are not one’s home.
Opposed at every point to wine in consumption, Georgians nevertheless
do not see the proliferation of beer consumption as representing a novel
Figure 8.1 Informal architectures of masculine sociability: (left) Rooftop beer
garden, (right) table installed in an empty lot in the working-class neighbourhood
of Varketili, Tbilisi
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 210
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 210
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:16 AM
BEER
211
phenomenon, but an extension of indigenous, or at least urban, traditions.
It follows that Georgian beer manufacturers will want to portray their
products as being consumed in recognizably Georgian traditional fashion.
This will involve ethnographic appeals to Georgian traditions, especially
of consumption, and also appeals to Georgian models of masculinity. But
as I want to show, this grounding of Georgian beers in Georgian notions
of ethnographic tradition and notions of masculinity takes two different
forms, sometimes commingled. On the one hand, there is a gesture to an
ideal of Georgian masculinity and tradition that is largely ethnographic,
grounded in the ethnographic representation of idealized ethnographic
groupings like the Pshavs and Khevsurs, discussed in
Chapter 7
, for
whom beer is a ritual drink. On the other hand, there is a grounding of
products in actual masculine practices of commensal sociability in modern
urban contexts, such as drinking beer in informal settings with friends,
accompanied by a simple meal including dried fi sh, a grounding of beer
in the informal commensal practices of actually experienced everyday life.
This whole constellation of features of Georgian beer marketing, in which
national brands are founded utilizing fundamentally ethnographic images
(whether idealized ethnographic images of idealized Georgian everyday
life (typifi ed by mountain groups like the Khevsurs) or prosaic images
of actually experienced everyday life (typifi ed by the practices of urban
Georgians)) from the national imagination, I call, in general, ethnographic
branding.
In many ways, ethnographic branding is simply an extension of a
relatively simple way to ground novel drink (Beer, Coca-Cola) in national
terrain by associating it with a traditional Georgian food (Georgian culinary
nationalism is certainly extremely well developed). While Coca-Cola seems
to sell itself in Georgia on the basis of its Westernness, every once in a while
Coca-Cola is marketed using a strategy of associating the Western drink
with Georgian foods. A recent Coca-Cola campaign elects certain dishes
to stand for the full range of Georgian cuisine including Western fast food:
kebabs,
khink’ali (dumplings),
khachap’uri (cheese bread), hamburgers,
cake. The traditional Georgian dishes selected happen to be stereotypically
associated with a different drink. The ad then insists that each dish is
really demanding Coke. Very much like Laghidze’s, here Coca-Cola sets
itself up the ‘rival of [other] drinks’, wine, beer, and even other soft drinks
like Laghidze’s (the ‘indigenous fast food’ association between Laghidze’s
waters and cheese bread is probably the place where Coca-Cola has been
most successful in inserting itself into the existing culinary system).
Georgians seem to be more open to novel drinks than they are novel
foods, probably because Georgian cuisine is quite good, though it is a variety
assembled out of a factually very limited repertoire (Zaza Shatirishvili,
personal communication). But grounding the novel brand name drink in a
stable traditional base of Georgian food seems to be a standard marketing
strategy. For all I know, this could be a local version of an international
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 211
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 211
2/21/2001 11:35:18 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:18 AM
212
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Figure 8.2 Traditional pairings of beer with food: Excerpted images from Tbilludi
commercial for their Khevsuruli and Shatili brands, with images of the product
montaged onto images of foods (fi sh) traditionally associated with beer (Tbilludi)
Coca-Cola ad campaign, after all, the basic gambit is highly portable, it
is hard to imagine how the logic of ‘pairing’ global drink and local food
could not be used virtually anywhere that people eat and drink. Beer, in
particular, is stereotypically linked to certain kinds of food, especially
dumplings called khink’ali and fi sh, often dried, which can be served in
fast food format, or, most importantly, can be prepared and served easily
without female labour. The ‘pairing’ of beer and fi sh is so stereotypical that
it represents obvious and oft-exploited way to give these beers the property
of ‘traditionalness-by-association’ ( Figure 8.2 ).
Both the Coca-Cola ad and the Tbilludi ads appear to be using the
same basic gambit: pair the newcomer drink to traditional food. However,
they are slightly different. The gambit of Coca-Cola pairs a single drink
with every kind of food (the list includes exemplars of every major type
of Georgian food, but also hamburgers and cake). Coca-Cola, then, is
making no attempt to become indigenous. It is a cosmopolitan drink, it
speaks to every locality, every food, in the same universal language. It can
go everywhere because it goes with anything. Beer, by contrast, is being
marketed here with a reference to traditional foods that are already being
eaten with beer locally. Beer is thus a local drink already associated with
local foods.
Dual lineages: Georgian tradition and
European technology
The pairing of product (beer) with a local food is the simplest way that
really any new drink (as a stranger) can be brought into the Georgian
family of traditional consumer goods. However, this ‘affi nal relation’ can
work both for ‘cosmopolitan’ drinks like Coca-Cola or ‘national’ drinks
like Georgian beer. To produce a more intimate linkage with the nation,
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 212
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 212
2/21/2001 11:35:18 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:18 AM
BEER
213
one needs to show that the drink itself has a Georgian lineage, or rather, to
maintain the desirable properties of both Westernness and Georgianness,
one needs to reckon this lineage bilaterally, resulting in ‘dual lineages’ for
Georgian beer brands.
In part this ‘dual lineage’ strategy responds to the problem in the
postsocialist period of creating a nonesuch, an oxymoron, a ‘domestic
brand’. Inasmuch as the very idea of brand ( pirmis ‘fi rm’) is closely linked
to the idea of ‘the West’ from the socialist period, Georgian brand makers
not only want to fi ll their brands with national iconography (ethnographic
branding), they also want to indigenize the notion of brand itself. That
is, if under socialism there was a sense that branded ( pirmis ) products
were almost by defi nition Western, not Georgian or Russian, the very
collocation ‘Georgian brand’ would appear to be a contradiction in
terms. The other problem is related to the fi rst, while Georgians prefer
to eat and drink locally produced goods, they are also convinced that
European goods (if they are real, that is, and not falsifi ed!) are produced
by obviously superior standards and technology. In the domain of food
and drink, if not, for example, cars, Georgian brand makers must gesture
not only to the indigenous quality of their goods (summed up under
the category of ‘tradition’) but also the European quality of their goods
(captured under the rubric of ‘quality’ or ‘technology’). To address this
problem, Georgian brand makers in the arena of beer have provided their
products with a ‘dual lineage’, gesturing both to Georgianness either in
the guise of culture (timeless Georgian traditions) or nature (Georgian
raw materials, especially water) and at the same time to European
technological modernity.
This ‘dual lineage’ is something that Georgians like to imagine themselves
as having with respect to Europe in general (in a manner that strongly
resembles modern Greece, see Herzfeld 1997). Georgia, a country on
the uncomfortable shifting border of an imagined geographic opposition
between Europe and Asia, does not like to emphasize the alterity of Europe
to Georgianness as modernity to tradition, for that would consign them
to be forever in the ‘backwards’ status of being traditional, and therefore
non-European, non-modern (for a more general discussion of Georgia’s
recent history see Pelkmans 2006, Manning 2007b). Such an untroubled
nostalgia for tradition is, perhaps, diagnostic of those who feel that their
claim to modernity is unchallengeable. Unlike other colonial situations,
such as the situation described by Chatterjee (1993), Georgians do not
oppose European technical modernity to indigenous Georgian tradition;
they treat them as being variations of the same thing. Georgians like to
say that they were European and modern before Europe, they experienced
a humanistic renaissance before Dante, and yet, they also sense that their
country is not yet, in fact, European and modern (Manning 2007b). The
same ambivalence attends the marketing of indigenous production, hence
Georgian producers suture together these uneasy discourses of opposition
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 213
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 213
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
214
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
and assimilation in a dual lineage, ambivalently ground their products both
in European technical modernity and Georgian tradition.
Regardless of the specifi c form of articulation, the problem such a
strategy addresses is how to incorporate Georgian goods into the ‘global
hierarchy of value’ (Herzfeld 2003) that confers prestige
uniquely on
foreign ‘fi rm goods’ (goods emanating from the ‘imaginary West’ (Yurchak
2005: chapter 5)) (see Chapter 5). Prior to the elaboration of postsocialist
Georgian production, Pelkmans has shown how foreign ‘fi rm’ goods and
their typifying material qualities were articulated into complex hierarchies
of value that in a sense refl ect an orientalist imaginary of alterity (which
privileges European foreign goods over Asian ones, which are strongly
associated with being falsifi cations of European goods), but also a socialist
one (which privileges quality (essence) over packaging (appearance)), so
that European goods (expensive, beautiful, good quality) outrank Russian
goods (cheap, good quality, but ugly), and these in turn outrank goods
from Turkey (cheap, relatively good looking, but poor quality) (Pelkmans
2006: 184–8). The strategy of ‘dual lineage’ seeks to overcome the inherited
opposition between Western ‘fi rm’ goods and local goods, by representing
goods as having a ‘dual lineage’. All sorts of products (beer, soft drinks, even
bread) are advertised as incorporating European technology with Georgian
traditions (some bread companies now insist that their traditional breads
are cooked on Italian stone ovens!), even European style beers marketed by
Georgian companies (with German or Czech brand names) insist that they
are marriages of German or Czech technology and Georgian traditions.
‘Industry will save Georgia’: The Topadze
ideology and Georgian beer
After the fall of socialism, in the Republic of Georgia, virtually all industrial
production of food commodities either disappeared or was faced with its
parasitic antithesis, falsifi cation. During this period, then-president Eduard
Shevardnadze quipped that ‘today there is more falsifi cation in Georgian
than production’ (Manning and Uplisashvili 2007: 640 n. 3). We have
already seen above how socialist products like Borjomi and Laghidze’s
waters suffered in the intervening period (Chapters 4–5). In this period
unemployed urban and rural Georgians retreated to ‘peasant’ subsistence
strategies and petty commodity production and transaction, including, as we
have seen, rampant falsifi cation of production. Many foodstuffs consumed
in Georgia were produced ‘traditionally’, that is, on private peasant plots.
The withdrawal of the state from production, and the collapse of the Soviet
Union as a unifi ed market, left ‘the nation’ as the only alternative model
in which the disassociated moments of production and consumption can
be reunited within a comprehensive social imaginary. In this context, new
Georgian industrial fi rms sought to ground their own lines of consumer
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 214
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 214
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
BEER
215
products, primarily beers and soft drinks, in ‘the nation’, catering not only
to distinctive Georgian consumer tastes (e.g. the ever-popular tarragon-
fl avoured soft drinks), but also making reference in marketing to the use of
‘traditional Georgian methods’ in production.
The greatest single exception to the generally dire situation of Georgian
industry is the beer industry (see in general Manning and Uplisashvili 2007).
In recent years Georgian beer producers have aggressively carved out a
dominant market share for products produced in Georgia. The frequently
quoted statistic is that something like 94 per cent of beer products consumed
in Georgia were manufactured in Georgia in 2004, effectively driving out
much of the foreign competition in just a few short years (Lomidze 2003).
The earliest success story here was the Kazbegi company, a company
equally well known for its soft drinks and ice tea production as it is for
beer production. Kazbegi is the fi rst company in Georgia to have developed
a successful and recognizable logo, a picture of one of the national icons
of Georgia, Mount Kazbek (Georgian Kazbegi), from which the company
takes its name, which in turn adorns all of its products in different lines.
Moreover, Gogi Topadze, founder of the Kazbegi company, is frequently
credited with this somewhat miraculous transformation of this sector of
the Georgian economy in the late 1990s into one that is now virtually
completely dominated by Georgian products.
Topadze’s example has had many imitators. Following the lead of what
the founder of Kazbegi, Gogi Topadze, calls the ‘Topadze ideology’, many
Georgian companies have emphasized a dual lineage for their products,
emphasizing both the European technological modernity of their products,
as well as the way their products embody in one way or another Georgian
tradition. Billboards throughout Georgia for a range of consumer products
often have the same rhetorical juxtaposition of, ‘European technology’ and
‘Georgian tradition’.
What then, is the ‘Topadze ideology’? Gogi Topadze, an easy-going,
charismatic man, is quite up front about the linkage of politics and
economics in his corporate ideology. After all, he is a (not particularly
successful) political fi gure in Georgia, the head of a political party with
the suggestive name ‘Industry will save Georgia’. The billboard of this
party, found outside the Kazbegi headquarters, resembles a socialist
era propaganda poster, showing in order all the separated moments of
industrial production from nature to market, from the rows of tea bushes
to the ships that carry the products overseas. Part of the Topadze ideology
is attempting to create an autarchic link of national production to national
consumption, one which mirrors in many respects the productivism of the
Laghidze ideology discussed in Chapter 5 . This happens both at the level
of marketing (the use of a logo on all products that links the company to
an important national landmark, to the specifi c brands which often index
specifi c areas within the nation), but also in production itself (through the
exclusive reliance on Georgian capital, labour, raw materials), and fi nally
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 215
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 215
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
216
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
consumption (Kazbegi is noted for having attempted to make not only beers
for Georgian consumption, but also soft drinks, cigarettes, and many other
common consumer goods).
Technology and tradition
The Topadze ideology is, among other things, an excellent example of both
‘ethnographic branding’ and ‘dual lineages’ as discussed above. Kazbegi’s
promotional literature reproduces images from traditional mountain
techniques of beer production drawn from ethnographic works as part
of a historical narrative that also connects up Kazbegi with German beer
Figure 8.3 Kazbegi beer and Georgian tradition: Ethnographic representations
of traditional Khevsur forms of beer production ( salude ) in Kazbegi promotional
literature (Kazbegi 1881 JSC)
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 216
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 216
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:19 AM
BEER
217
manufacturing in Georgia (the Kazbegi plant is on the site of the nineteenth-
century German beer plant, the Wenzel Brewery). The traditions of the
mountain dwelling beer brewers are shown in illustrations drawn from
classic Georgian ethnographies of their technical apparatus (a massive
copper vat with the legend ludis saxarshi kvabi (‘Beer brewing vat’) is
depicted) as well as the ritual apparatus to which beer production is linked
in mountain communities (a Georgian mountain shrine priest carrying a
sacred fl ag ( drosha ) and various sacred shrine buildings including the beer
brewing building, are depicted) ( Figure 8.3 ). Opposite them are shown
colour photographs of the contemporary functionally equivalent structures
in the modern Kazbegi factory ( Figure 8.4 ). This dual lineage of ‘tradition
and technology’ allows Kazbegi to claim that they have ‘restored the
traditions of the mountain-dwellers, thanks to ancient national methods of
beer production enriched by new technology’.
Figure 8.4 Kazbegi beer and European technology (Kazbegi 1881 JSC)
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 217
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 217
2/21/2001 11:35:23 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:23 AM
218
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
The local branch of the French manufacturing giant Castel, too, proclaims
in its radio ads for its ‘Khevsur beer’ brand Aluda the traditionality of its
beer production, ‘masculine traditions brought down from the mountains’,
and the rest of its ads emphasize that Aluda is ‘Our Beer’, ‘prepared with
traditional Khevsur methods’, although Aluda is produced in a modern
European factory in Georgia by a European company. When asked how this
particular beer, which tasted like any other lager, could be called ‘Khevsur
beer’, the Aluda representative I met with just smiled. That was in 2004.
Three years later, a Castel ad claimed to make use of ‘traditional Khevsur
methods of beer brewing’, by which specifi cally is meant ‘copper vats’. The
text and photographs of the ad suggest that modern copper distilling vats
(used by virtually all beer producers) are somehow an extension of the
traditional Khevsur vats (e.g. seen in the Kazbegi ad above):
The Khevsur beer Aluda is prepared with traditional Khevsur methods
of beer brewing using copper vats. The best barley malts and the highest
quality hops together with fl avorful Georgian water gives this beer its
refi ned and pleasant fl avor. (Castel-Sakartvelo ad 2007)
Here the Castel company has seized on a happenstance convergence of
technological features, that, in general, copper is the best metal for such vats
(though according to Khevsurs, it is not the copper kvabi (vat) that affects
the outcomes in terms of taste, but a wooden container called the k’odi ).
In every other respect, these ‘Khevsur beers’ bear no resemblance in taste
to the actual Khevsur beers. And, of course no one would actually attempt
to produce authentic mountain style beer, because actual mountain beer
is dark, thick, sweet and prone to giving powerful headaches, like an evil
version of Guinness; a Georgian friend likened it memorably to sweetened
motor oil. There is certainly no sign of an indigenous movement of culinary
luddites seeking to deindustrialize existing industrial food production
in Georgia, unlike Europe and North America (Laudan 2001, Meneley
2004, Heath and Meneley 2007, cf. the Western artisanal vodkas and gins
discussed earlier in Chapter 3). What then is the point of appealing to these
mountain traditions of brewing, if no one actually intends to use them?
Ethnographic branding: Khevsur beer
Kazbegi is not the only beer company in Georgia to market its products
using traditional imagery from the Georgian mountains. Two other
Georgian companies, Lomisi and Tbilludi, as well as the local branch of the
French industrial giant Castel, have borrowed this aspect of the ‘Topadze
ideology’ to market their products. In order to ground this new range of
beer products in ‘the nation’, Georgian marketers for these companies
have created an explosion of brands that harkened to Georgia’s imagined
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 218
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 218
2/21/2001 11:35:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:27 AM
BEER
219
traditional exemplars: various groups of ethnic Georgians who inhabit the
mountains of Georgia adjacent to Chechnya, mountain groups like the
Khevsurs, the Pshavs and the Tush who have, since the nineteenth century,
been sacralized by generations of Georgian ethnographers as being the true
bearers of the authentic Georgian way of life (Manning 2007a). In Georgia,
since the late nineteenth century, the mountains of Georgia, regions like
Pshavi and Khevsureti, have been understood to represent the unchanging
masculine traditional life of Georgia, the Georgian past in the present, just
as the plains of Georgia, regions like Kartli where the capital city, Tbilisi, is
located, represent the present and future life of the country:
Here [in the inaccessible mountains of Pshav-Khevsureti], in this homeland
the Pshav-Khevsur have preserved unchanged until today their ancient,
ancestral customs, life, past traditions. In this respect the Pshav-Khevsur
is more Georgian [ kartveli ] (if it can be said so), than the Kartlian [ kartleli ,
resident of Kartli, the central Georgian province] himself. The Kartlian
lives more in the present, in the future. If he had not turned his back on
the past, still, he avoids facing it. (Khizanishvili 1940 [1889]: 1)
These fi erce and free, hospitable and brave mountaineers, spouting poetry
and avenging blood for blood, are felt to embody all that is best about
Georgians in general (see Chapter 7). Georgian advertisers have turned to
this ready-made iconography of the ‘nation’, itself mostly inherited from
the socialist period, to articulate their claims to a national market, turning
idealized fi gures of ethnographic and folkloric Others into images that
could be used to organize an array of industrial products for a national
market. In an interview as early as 1996, Topadze connected his choice of
the name Kazbegi and familiar national symbol of Mount Kazbegi as the
logo of his products to indigenous ethnographic traditions of beer brewing
preserved by mountain dwellers:
You will remember, that the population of our mountainous regions,
the Mokhevians [residents of the area around Mount Kazbegi] and
Khevsurs since time immemorial pursued the brewing of beer with folk
technology. In our own production are inserted nuances of precisely this
technology and for that reason too these names were chosen. (Tbilisi
1996: 2–3)
Whatever these ‘nuances of folk technology’ might have been, by 2005 the
tendency to use different ethnographic groups, the Khevsurs, the Pshavs, the
Tush, from a small region of the Caucasus mountains bordering Chechnya,
to categorize and differentiate what were essentially all the same lagers
(‘ethnographic branding’) had reached a high point. In effect, the beer
brands of Georgia of the period look just a little bit like the contents of the
Georgian ethnographic museum, in bottled form.
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 219
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 219
2/21/2001 11:35:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:27 AM
220
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
Just as the plains dwellers of Georgia traditionally drink wine, for these
mountain dwellers the traditional ritual drink is beer, allowing beer to be
identifi ed as a traditional Georgian beverage alongside wine, a beverage
associated with the timeless ethnographic traditions, rituals and general
masculinity of the Georgian highlanders. The labels of the Castel company’s
Khevsurian beer Aluda and the Kazbegi beer Pshavi both reproduce familiar
ethnographic images of the typical Khevsur ( Figure 8.5 ) or typical Pshavian
( Figure 8.6 ) man in traditional dress in a suggestive traditional landscape.
Figure 8.5 ‘Aluda: A Khevsur beer’ (Castel-Sakartvelo)
Figure 8.6 ‘Pshavi: A wheat beer’ (Kazbegi 1881 JSC)
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 220
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 220
2/21/2001 11:35:27 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:27 AM
BEER
221
This level of brand iconography, then, identifi es beer brands with respect
to signifi cant portions of the social imaginary of the nation, what we have
called ‘ethnographic branding’ (Manning and Uplisashvili 2007). Such
brand iconography draws on fi gures of ethnographic alterity (cf. Coombe
1996) recognizable from the ethnographic imagining of the Georgian nation,
including both men in traditional costume as well as typical architecture and
even sometimes traditional beer brewing technology. Not merely fi gures of
complete otherness, such ethnographic fi gures drawn from the imaginary of
the Georgian nation serve as ‘surrogate identities’ (Coombe 1996: 210), what
Mazzarella calls ‘prosthetic personalities’ (2003: 187–92), through which
consumers can identify themselves and the product they are consuming as
being part of a specifi cally Georgian tradition of beer consumption.
Traditions of everyday life: Drinking beer in the
‘city of balconies’
If the exemplars of mountain tradition in beer marketing as in ethnography
are human fi gures, usually macho men in traditional costume as portrayed
on the labels of ‘Aluda’ or ‘Pshavi’, urban tradition is more often expressed
emblematically in architectural form. Tbilisi is sometimes called ‘the city
of balconies’, and the architectural unity of the urban courtyard ( ezo ) and
the associated balconies ( aivani ) typical of traditional Tbilisi architecture
has a particular signifi cance, forming in particular a kind of architectural
objectifi cation of ethnographic forms of sociability typical of Georgian
urban life (Manning 2009a). For one, balconies and courtyards form an
easily recognizable fi gure for the traditional life of the city, a life understood
to be typifi ed by a kind of bohemian, happy-go-lucky ( dardimandi ) form of
sociability involving, again, drinking. And, of course, since the nineteenth
century German Wentzel beer factory and German colony made beer
gardens part of Georgian urban life, beer drinking is an authentically urban
custom. Hence, it is not surprising that, alongside mountain beers, there
have appeared ‘Tbilisi beers’, such as the Kazbegi brand ‘Tbilisi’, whose
typical ad does nothing more than represent the stereotypical, nostalgic
cityscape of old Tbilisi, replete with its striking traditional balconies, in the
manner of an old, grainy, black and white fi lm.
The architectural unity of balcony plus courtyard is not only emblematic
of the nostalgic urban bohemia of ‘old Tbilisi’, it also is symbolic of a kind
of architecture of sociability that typifi es what is sometimes called ‘the
city of balconies’ (Manning 2009a): a space outside the domestic sphere of
the family, but yet interior, away from the public space of the street. The
recursive properties of public and private with respect to spaces (Gal 2002)
are exhibited here: the balcony represents the exterior of the interior space,
the public aspect of the private household, so the courtyard differs from the
street by being the interior, private aspect of the absolute public, exterior,
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 221
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 221
2/21/2001 11:35:30 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:30 AM
222
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
represented by the street. Some Georgian commentators will claim, thus,
that the balcony and courtyard architecture characteristic of Tbilisi presents
a set of medial spaces, partially open, partially closed, compared to the
relatively absolute oppositions between interior/exterior, private and public
exhibited in ‘Western’ domestic architecture:
The Tbilisian balconied house, often with one face looking from the
courtyard to the street, indicates openness, open relationships; on the
other hand, the facades and the principals of internal planning and
organization of space also attests that the openness is not absolute.
(Qipiani 2003: 10)
Taken together, the architectural complex of balcony plus courtyard,
represent a medial ‘third space’ between the domestic sphere and the public
sphere (on ‘third spaces’ see Oldenberg 1989). It is the space of neighbourly
sociability, between coresident kin associated with the household and
the complete strangers on the street. In fact, the word Georgian word for
‘neighbour’ ( mezobeli ) etymologically means ‘one who shares the same
courtyard ( ezo ).’ Being a space of informal sociability that is not a domestic
space, these spaces are perfect emblems of the kind of non-domestic,
masculine sociability associated with beer.
In the following Aluda ad, two older men in the courtyard are completing
a game of backgammon, and they recruit from their neighbours on the
surrounding balconies the means for an informal beer-drinking session.
Particularly emblematic here is fi sh, which as we have seen is a food
traditionally consumed with beer and many ads accompany images of beer
being consumed in tandem with seafood ( Figure 8.7 ).
A man appears above on a balcony:
First Man:
besos gaumarjos!
Hey Beso!
Second Man:
bich’o, ro gamogipenia, eg tevzi, erti-ori chamokseni da chamodi!
Hey man, the fi sh that you have hanging there, cut down one or
two and come on down!
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 222
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 222
2/21/2001 11:35:30 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:30 AM
BEER
223
Another man appears in his window:
Second Man:
Garcho! Garcho, ager tevzi gvak . . ..
Garcho! Garcho, we have fi sh . . ..
Garcho:
Gasagebia.
Understood.
Aluda, Chveni Ludi
Aluda, Our Beer.
Figure 8.7 Aluda ad: Traditional Tbilisi courtyard
Conclusion: European machines in
Georgian gardens
Interestingly, in the Aluda ad, drinking Aluda transports the drinkers from
the informal sociable space of the urban courtyard into the lap of nature.
This brings me to my fi nal point. We have seen two models of dual lineage
marketing in which Georgia is fi gured as ‘ethnographic tradition’ standing
in opposition to ‘European technology’. However, this dual lineage can
be as simple as reducing the opposition between Georgia and Europe to
‘nature’ and ‘culture’, that is, Georgian ‘mountain’ tradition appears in the
form of Georgian raw materials (particularly mountain spring water, for
which Georgia, as we have seen in Chapter 4 , is famous), and European
technology. The advantage this particular strategy has is that it is far
more widely applicable (since it doesn’t depend on the recognizability
of some ethnographic form of Georgian tradition) and it is grounded in
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 223
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 223
2/21/2001 11:35:31 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:31 AM
224
THE SEMIOTICS OF DRINK AND DRINKING
a natural raw material, one which may in fact really constitute the one
unambiguously Georgian contribution to the beer (since not only is the
technology imported, but often, the barley and hops). In addition, it
refl ects a Russo-Georgian discourse inherited from the colonial period
in which the nature of Georgia envisioned as a virginal Edenic garden
(Layton 1992), a vision of Georgia as a world of unsullied nature which
is particularly associated on the one hand with the vineyards and wines
of Georgia, and on the other hand with the abundant natural waters of
Georgia (Van Assche et al. forthcoming)
Such a ‘dual’ branding strategy is found, for example, in a commercial
by the now-defunct Tbilludi for their mountain beer ‘Tushuri’. The Tbilludi
beer Tushuri was a late-comer to the ethnographic beer game, as evidence
by the fact that they chose a neglected and somewhat obscure beer-drinking
mountaineer group, the Tush, who lack both the Pshavian love of poetry
and the dashing, macho gallantry of the Khevsurs. Hence, Tbilludi chose
to associate their ‘Tushuri’ product with the indubitably fresh and clean
mountain water of Tusheti:
Pure as a mountain waterfall, pleasant as spring water, as good for
you as mountain air: yet another surprise for beer lovers from the fi rm
‘Tbilludi’ – Tushian Beer. Trust in the rich traditions of the mountains and
discover real Georgian fl avor all over again. (Tushuri – 2005 TbilLudi)
But the Tushuri campaign hovers indecisively between attempting to
ground the beer in the ‘human’ or the ‘non-human’ order of the mountains:
Tushian tribesmen about which, generally, Georgians know or care very
little, or the pure mountain water of the Tushian highlands.
By contrast, the newest and most successful Georgian beer company,
Natakhtari, completely eschews any appeals to Georgian traditional past at
all, but does make considerable hay out of its connection to an actual well-
known natural spring water source of the same name. Since Natakhtari
markets itself as ‘the Georgian beer of tomorrow’, it is also quite aggressive
in claiming the newest German and Czech technologies (one of its beers is
called Kubichek , named after the Czech technologist ( pivovar ) who is in
charge of the factory), claiming only the pure Georgian water of the village
of Natakhtari as its claim to indigenity:
Natakhtari beer represents a product of the highest quality prepared from
the best German raw materials using the newest brewing technologies.
The unique water of Natakhtari used during the brewing process gives
the beer its unique properties of fl avor. The beer brewery Natakhtari
represents the newest and most modern beer factory not only in Georgia,
but in the entire region. This is represented also in the quality of its
products. (Natakhtari 2007)
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 224
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 224
2/21/2001 11:35:33 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:33 AM
BEER
225
This then is the simplest, but also most ultimately persuasive, version of the
‘dual lineage’ discourse, by which the category of production, a hybrid of
culture and nature is divided into separable parts: Georgianness is reduced
to the natural order (specifi cally the water from the spring from which the
brand takes its name), the latest German or Czech technology (and other
raw materials) standing in for the cultural order. It is perhaps the most
persuasive because it does not rely on an aspirational strategy of ‘heritage
cues’, which point to an ethnographic craft tradition which the companies
do not concretely use, and which would rely, on a discourse of artisanal
production which is generally absent from socialist and postsocialist
discourse in any case. Rather, it is grounded directly in the ontological
primes of a naturalist ontology, nature and culture (technology), and
mobilizes water as a primordial exponent of ‘nature’. This is particularly
effective because, as Wilk observes ‘water is more than a symbol of the
natural world; it is usually seen as the very substance of the natural world’
(Wilk 2006: 308).
Since ultimately Georgian discourse about Georgia, and socialist
discourses about production, are more strongly grounded in the idea of
Georgia as ‘nature’ (Layton 1992), and Georgian water (spas turned nature
parks like Borjomi) has always been one of the strongest single exemplars
of this discourse of nature in Georgia (van Assche et al. forthcoming), it
is clear that the strongest articulation of the ‘dual lineage’ discourse is
one that keeps nature and culture most clearly separate. In this sense, the
discourse of Natakhtari is very different from the European discourse of
terroir in which artisanal tradition and natural locality are fused together
in a ‘picturesque’ model of nature (Parry 2008), but strangely similar to the
new world (American) model of nature as a pristine wilderness in which
technology enters as a separate element, a distinctively American ‘pastoral
design’ (Marx 1964). In a sense, then, Natakhtari is a kind of Georgian
version of the American pastoral motif of the ‘machine in the garden’, a
hybrid ‘middle landscape’ in which two sets of forces, Georgian nature and
European technology, fi nd themselves in an uneasy harmony.
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 225
9781441160188_Ch08_Final_txt_print.indd 225
2/21/2001 11:35:33 AM
2/21/2001 11:35:33 AM
NOTES
Chapter One
1 In this attempt this book is part of, and draws on directly or indirectly, a much
larger recent literature in semiotic anthropology, an incomplete list of this ‘new
materialist’ semiotic anthropology would include in particular Elyachar 2010,
Fehervary 2009, Harkness 2011, forthcoming, Hull 2003, 2012, Irvine 1989,
Keane 2003, Kockelman 2005, 2010, Lemon 1998, 2000, 2009, Manning
2008, 2009b, Manning and Meneley 2008, Meneley 2008, Munn 1977, 1986,
Nakassis forthcoming a, forthcoming b, Parmentier 1994, Silverstein 2003,
Stasch 2003, among many others.
2 ‘Firstness is the mode of being of that which is such as it is, positively and
without reference to anything else. Secondness is the mode of being of that
which is such as it is, with respect to a second but regardless of any third.
Thirdness is the mode of being of that which is such as it is, in bringing a
second and third into relation to each other’ (Peirce 1931–58: 8.328).
Chapter Two
1 For a fascinating look at the ambivalent role of fat in the consumption of
Starbucks coffee, see Willson (2005).
2 See Hutchby 2001a for a similarly broadened view of conversation as
potentially including ‘quasi-conversations’, for example, technologically
mediated conversational interactions in internet IRC chat or even
conversations between humans and non-humans (chatbots, expert systems,
computers).
3 Baristas sinsation, ‘stupid ignorant customers’, http://community.livejournal.
com/baristas/2004/10/04, electronic document, accessed 26 January 2008.
4 Compare Manning (2001, 2002, 2004) for a commodity with discrete lexicons
in distinct languages relating to production and consumption of a single
commodity.
5 As Laurier (2003, pp. 8–9) notes, a customer who formulates request for coffee
using connoisseur terminology like ‘ristretto’ (thus indexing the fact that they
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 226
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 226
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
NOTES
227
really care about their coffee) will sometimes elicit a special ‘connoisseur’
performance from a barista, who may make a show of throwing out a batch
of espresso that came out bad and making a new one that has the desired
properties.
6 Baristas larksong, http://community.livejournal.com/baristas/2004/10/04,
electronic document, accessed 26 January 2008.
7 www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1857/grundrisse/ch10.htm#p524
8 Baristas verbalxxassault, ‘the scenario: will I be fi red?’ http://community.
livejournal.com/baristas/2004/12/03, electronic document, accessed 26 January
2008.
9 Baristas lyssafae, ‘rant!’ http://community.livejournal.com/baristas/2007/11/25,
electronic document, accessed 26 January 2008.
10 I would like to thank Anne Meneley for bringing this quote and its relevance to
my attention.
11 Baristas mothinfl ight, ‘happy freaking new years’, http://community.livejournal.
com/baristas/2005/01/02, electronic document, accessed 1 February 2006.
Chapter Three
1 www.oldtomgin.co.uk/oldtomprimer/
2 www.kithfan.org/work/transcripts/three/girldrnk.html
3 http://blog.infi nitemonkeysblog.com/archive/000092.html
4 www.oocities.org/martinisu/Anything.html
5 www.gintime.com/features/bombay-sapphire-botanicals.php
6 All references are to www.gintime.com/
7 www.oldtomgin.co.uk/oldtomprimer/
8 All references are to www.gintime.com/
9 www.44northvodka.com/AboutUs.htm
10 http://crystalheadvodka.com/welcome, www.iceberg.ca, www.sednavodka.com
11 All references are to www.gintime.com
Chapter Four
1 Both Vann (2006) and Nakassis (forthcoming a, forthcoming b) show other
instances of semiotic parasitism that show other ways in which parasitic
mimicry can exist without necessarily embracing notions of authenticity found
here.
2 This brand is also known as BonAqua/BonAqa/Bonaqua in different parts of
Europe, Asia, Africa and Eurasia, and Aquabona in Spain.
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 227
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 227
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
228
NOTES
3 However, it should be added, socialism, as a sometimes imitative competitor
of capitalism, created brand-like forms of product differentiation without, of
course, indexing rival producers (Gronow 2003, Fehervary 2009, Manning
2009b, for comparable ‘parasitic’ extensions of brand beyond the source
indexing function see Vann 2006, Nakassis forthcoming a and forthcoming b).
The net result for many socialist ‘brands’ under postsocialism was that many
newly privatized fi rms found themselves producing local rivalrous versions of a
once pan-Soviet ‘brand’, so that a brand that was not a trademark, like Kosmos
or Astra cigarettes would have been produced by many production units under
socialism in different republics, but after the collapse of socialism, this brand
could acquire the rivalrous properties of a trademark, the obvious problem
being who would be allowed monopolistic use of the brand.
4 www.borjomi.ge/en/water/facts.php
5 Ibid.
6 As Paul Kockelman notes (personal communication): ‘here the STS defi nition
of “immutable mobile” really ends up reifying more than it reveals – qua
infrastructure, on the one hand, and that which passes through it, on the other.
Or, framed another way, it makes a Shannon-esque distinction between channels
and messages/signals, forgetting that most messages are [Peircean] thirds (caught
up in continual interpretation) rather than [Peircean] seconds (simply passed on,
copied, or “circulated”)’. See Kockelman 2010 for a detailed exposition of some
of these themes.
7 Gvaramia 1997: 2–3, Imnaishvili 1998: 9.
8 Comcon Thirst calls http://eng.comcon-2.com/default.asp?artID=889 Spelling of
common names has been adjusted.
Chapter Five
1 As we will see below, the term fi rmennye could also be applied to indigeneous
goods under certain circumstances, this usage to indicate ‘foreign’, however, is
the stereotypical one.
2 Some of these made-up names of course are derived from real descriptors, but
the point is that under Western trademark law, if they were simply descriptive,
they could not be protected as trademarks.
Chapter Six
1 Here I am not trying to produce an empirical account of the actual pragmatics
of toasts at the supra (see, for example, Holisky 1989, Kotthoff 1995, Mülhfried
2005a, 2005b, Tuite 2005), here I am primarily interested in the ‘metapragmatic
supra’, the kind of supra that is described when people talk about supras
in general, whether while participating in them or reporting on them. Since
‘metapragmatic’ talk about supras is also a necessary component of the
pragmatics of supras, of course, I am concerned with how actual practices do or
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 228
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 228
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
NOTES
229
do not fi t these models, but I am primarily interested in the ‘semiotic ideology’
of the supra.
2 I note parenthetically that the order ( rigi ) of toasts also varies according to
region, something which people often comment on when they introduce a toast,
justifying it by reference to the regional ‘order’ that allows that order (I thank
Florian Mühlfried for reminding me of this). See, for example, Holisky 1989,
Kotthoff 1995, Mühlfried 2005.
3 The specifi c argument for the ‘invented tradition’ thesis about the supra would
require quite a bit of background detail, so I am only interested in the fact that
the argument was made at all.
Chapter Seven
1 The drink in question is called araq’i which is generally translated as ‘vodka’
(though Khevsur vodka is extremely weak, resembling Korean soju (on which
see Harkness 2011, forthcoming)), as opposed to another home-distilled
beverage called ch’ach’a commonly found in the plains (which is stronger and
tastes more or less like Italian grappa). In certain mountain regions, notably
Pshavi (Florian Mühlfried, personal communication) and among the Pshavians
of Pankisi, vodka (sometimes Ch’ach’a) has replaced beer across the board for
all ritual contexts, underlining vodka’s ‘unmarked’ status which allows it to take
the place of beer in ritual.
2 The earliest accounts we have of a similar kind of romantic relationship
( ts’ats’loba ) in Pshavi, too, in the nineteenth century, defi ne a girlfriend
( ts’ats’ali ) as ‘sort of like a sworn sister’ ‘a pretend sworn sister’ ( vitom dobili )
differing from a true sworn sister in that she has an erotic function, and further
imply that the relationship is formed ritually in an identical way in both sworn
siblinghood and romantic cases (by what is called ‘the oath of silver’, drinking
vodka with silver fl akes) (Mamsashvili, ‘Mgzavris Shenishvnebi’, Droeba 1880,
no. 102, 3). Whether or not this is an outsider’s casual error, clearly, there was
enough resemblance between the two for them to be mistaken for one another,
down to the ritual of drinking vodka that creates the relations.
3 ‘Going with vodka’ is a kind of intimate gift when used between dzmobilis ,
the same act can occur between enemies, too, in which case the party who
‘goes with vodka’ is, in effect, abasing themselves before their enemy, begging
forgiveness, rather than paying a hefty fi ne in cows.
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 229
9781441160188_Notes_Final_txt_print.indd 229
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
2/21/2001 11:39:17 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abercrombie & Fitch v. Hunting World (1976), Legal Decision. Electronic
document, www.altlaw.org/v1/cases/549267 , accessed 10 October 2011.
Agha, A. (2007), Language and Social Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Agnew, J.-C. (1986), Worlds Apart: The Market and the Theatre in Anglo-
American Thought, 1550–1750. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Akopiani, M. (2007), ‘Brendingi-II’. Electronic document, www.sapientisat.ge/
themes/nikoloz/business/SapientiSat_BJ_2007_N6_April_Branding_2.pdf,
accessed 10 October 2011.
Aleksandria, G. (1989), ‘Saxeli sjobs konebasa’. Kutaisi 18 July, 2.
Amis, K. (2008), Everyday Drinking . New York: Bloomsbury.
Asad, T. (1988), ‘Towards a genealogy of the concept of ritual’, in W. James and
D. Johnson (eds), Vernacular Christianity: Essays in the Social Anthropology
of Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 73–87.
Aslanishvili, A. (1989), ‘Saidumlo khalkhs darcha: mit’ropane laghidzis
dabadebis 120 tsl’istavi’. K’omunist’i 19 July, 4.
Austin, J. L. (1962), How to Do Things with Words: The William James Lectures
Delivered at Harvard University in 1955 . Oxford: Clarendon.
Bagdavadze, L., Beon, O., Hrkal, Z., Laurendon, P., Puyoo, S. and Santrucek,
J. (2008), ‘Effects of groundwater exploitation on the Borjomi mineral water
reservoir in Georgia’. Environmental Geology 54, 1301–11.
Bakhtin, M. (1986), Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Trans. M. McGee.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
Baliauri, N. (1991), Sts’orp’roba Khevsuretshi. Tbilisi: Tbilisi University Press.
Barth, F. (1964), The Nomads of South Persia . London: Allan & Unwin.
Bauman, R. (2004), A World of Others’ Words: Cross-Cultural Perspectives on
Intertextuality. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Bently, L. (2008), ‘The making of modern trade mark law: the construction
of the legal concept of trade mark (1860–80)’, in L. Bently, J. Davis and
J. C. Ginsburg (eds), Trade Marks and Brands: An Interdisciplinary Critique .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3–41.
Bourdieu, P. (1984), Distinction: A Critique of the Judgment of Taste. Trans.
R. Nice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bregadze, L. (2000), ‘Sadghegrdzelo da misi kompensatoruli buneba’, in
G. Nodia (ed.), Kartuli Supra da Samokalako Sazogadoeba. Tbilisi: CIPDD,
pp. 9–15.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 230
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 230
2/25/2012 3:13:53 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:53 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
231
Bridge, R. (2005), ‘Coke, Tarhoon and globalization’. The Moscow News.
Electronic document, http://english.mn.ru/english/issue.php?2004-5-34,
accessed 4 January 2005.
Burke, P. (1993), The Art of Conversation . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Callon, M., Méadel, C. and Rabeharisoa, V. (2002), ‘The economy of qualities’.
Economy and Society 31(2), 194–217.
Cameron, D. (2000), Good to Talk? London: Sage.
— (2008), ‘Talk from the top down’. Language & Communication 28(2),
143–55.
Chambers, T. (2002), Drinking the Waters: Creating an American Leisure Class
at Nineteenth Century Mineral Springs . Washington, DC: Smithsonian.
Chandler, D. (1994), Semiotics for Beginners. Electronic document, www.aber.
ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B, accessed 8 October 2011.
Chapelle, F. (2005), Wellsprings: A Natural History of Bottled Spring Waters .
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Chatterjee, P. (1993), The Nation and Its Fragments. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Cherry, E. C. (1953), ‘Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with
one and with two ears’. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 25(5),
975–9.
Churchill, E. (2010), ‘Sugared puppy-dog tails: gender and design’. Interactions
17(2), 52–6.
Clark, K. (1981), The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Clegg, A. (2005), ‘The myth of authenticity’. Bloomberg Business Week.
Electronic document, www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/aug2005/
id20050812_942858.htm, accessed 10 October 2011.
Coley, N. (1990), ‘Physicians, chemists and the analysis of mineral waters: “The
most diffi cult part of chemistry”’. Medical History Supplement 10, 56–66.
Coombe, R. (1996), ‘Embodied trademarks: mimesis and alterity on American
commercial frontiers’. Cultural Anthropology 11(2), 202–4.
Coronil, F. (1995), ‘Introduction to the Duke University Press edition’, in F. Ortiz,
Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, pp. ix–lvi.
Darwin, C. (1959), On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray.
Davis, J. (2008), ‘Between a sign and a brand: mapping the boundaries of a
registered trade mark in European Union trade mark law’, in L. Bently, J. Davis
and J. C. Ginsburg (eds), Trade Marks and Brands: An Interdisciplinary
Critique. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 65–91.
Dege, N. (2005), ‘Categories of bottled water’, in D. Senior and N. Dege (eds),
Technology of Bottled Water , second edition. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 28–92.
Descola, P. (1996), ‘Constructing natures: symbolic ecology and social practice’,
in P. Descola and G. Pálson (eds), Nature and Society: Anthropological
Perspectives . London: Routledge, pp. 82–102.
Dietler, M. (2006), ‘Alcohol: anthropological/archaeological perspectives’.
Annual Review of Anthropology 35, 229–49.
Dillon, P. (2002), Gin: The Much-Lamented Death of Madam Geneva . Boston,
MA: Justin, Charles & Co.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 231
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 231
2/25/2012 3:13:53 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:53 AM
232
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Douglas, M. (1987), ‘A distinctive anthropological perspective’, in M. Douglas
(ed.), Constructive Drinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 3–15.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992), ‘Analyzing talk at work: an introduction’, in
P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds), Talk at Work . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 3–65.
Dumas, A. (1962[1853]), Adventures in Caucasia. Trans. and ed. A. E. Murch.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Dunham, V. (1976), In Stalin’s Time: Middleclass Values in Soviet Fiction.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Edmunds, L. (1981), The Silver Bullet: The Martini in American Civilization .
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
— (1998), Martini: Straight Up. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
— (2001), ‘Modernism and the Martini’. Electronic document, www.oocities.org/
martinisu/ModernismandMart.html , accessed 10 October 2010.
Ellis, M. (2002), ‘The devil’s ordinary’. Electronic document, www.
cabinetmagazine.org/issues/8/coffeehouse.php, accessed 10 October 2010.
— (2004), The Coffee House: A Cultural History . London: Weidenfeld &
Nicolson.
— (2008), ‘Introduction to the coffee house: a discursive model’. Language and
Communication 28, 156–64.
Elyachar, J. (2010), ‘Phatic labor, infrastructure, and the question of
empowerment in Cairo’. American Ethnologist 37(3), 452–64.
Fehervary, K. (2009), ‘Goods and states: the political logic of state-socialist
material culture’. Comparative Studies in Society and History 51(2), 426–59.
Finlayson, D. (2005), ‘Market development of bottled waters’, in D. Senior
and N. Dege (eds), Technology of Bottled Water , second edition. Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 6–27.
Fitzpatrick, S. (1992), The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary
Russia . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Foster, R. (2005), ‘Commodity futures: love, labour, and value’. Anthropology
Today 21(4), 8–12.
— (2007), ‘The work of the new economy: consumers, brands and value creation’.
Cultural Anthropology 22(4), 707–31.
— (2008a), Coca-Globalization . New York: Palgrave.
— (2008b), ‘Show and tell: teaching critical fetishism with a bottle of Coke?’
Anthropology News 49(4), 38.
Frake, C. (1964), ‘How to ask for a drink in Subanun’. American Anthropologist
66(6), 127–32.
Fresh Minds (2006), A Fresh Look at Super-Premium Spirits: The Use of
Educational and Aspirational Messages in Drinks Advertising. Electronic
document, www.scribd.com/doc/20382/FreshMinds-Drinks-Report, accessed
10 October 2011.
Gal, S. (2002), ‘A semiotics of the public/private distinction’. Differences 15(1),
77–95.
Gal, S. and Kligman, G. (2000), The Politics of Gender After Socialism .
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gaudio, R. (2003), ‘Coffeetalk: Starbucks ™ and the commercialization of casual
conversation’. Language in Society 32(5), 659–91.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 232
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 232
2/25/2012 3:13:53 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:53 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
233
Gibson, J. J. (1979), The Ecological Approach to Perception. London: Houghton
Miffl in.
Goch’oridze. G. (1993), Tusheti. Tbilisi: Mecniereba.
Gociridze, G. (2001), ‘Vin ebrdzvis kartul supras?’ Lit’erat’uli Sakartvelo , 23–29
March, 7.
Goffman, E. (1959), The Representation of Self in Everyday Life . Garden City,
NY: Doubleday.
— (1976), ‘Replies and responses’. Language in Society 5, 257–313.
— (1983), ‘The interaction order’. American Sociological Review 48, 1–17.
Gogochuri, D. (1974), Melekseoba Khevsuretshi. Tbilisi: Sabch’ota Sakartvelo.
Gogolauri, T. (1996), Gana Laghi Var, Roma vmgher . . . Tbilisi: Int’elekt’i.
Green, M. and Green, T. (1985), The Best Bottled Waters in the World . New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Gronow, J. (2003), Caviar with Champagne: Common Luxury and the Ideals of
the Good Life in Stalin’s Russia . Oxford: Berg.
Gvaramia, V. (1997), [Untitled]. Kavkasia 11(535), 2–3.
Haber, E. (2003), The Myth of the Non-Russian: Iskander and Aitmatov’s
Magical Universe. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Habermas, J. (1991), The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. Trans.
T. Burger. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hamlin, C. (1990a), ‘Chemistry, medicine and the legitimation of English spas,
1740–1840’. Medical History Supplement 10, 67–81.
— (1990b), A Science of Impurity: Water Analysis in Nineteenth Century
Britain . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hanby, T. (1999), ‘Brands – dead or alive?’ Journal of the Market Research
Society 41(1), 1–11.
Harkness, N. (2011), ‘ Culture and interdiscursivity in Korean fricative voice
gestures’ . Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 21(1), 99–123.
— (forthcoming), ‘Softer Soju in South Korea’. Anthropological Quarterly .
Heath, D. and Meneley, A. (2007), ‘Techne, technoscience, and the circulation of
comestible commodities: an introduction’. American Anthropologist 109(4),
593–602.
Herzfeld, M. (1997), Cultural Intimacy: Social Poetics in the Nation State .
London: Routledge.
— (2003), The Body Impolitic: Artisans and Artifi ce in the Global Hierarchy of
Value. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
— (2007), ‘Postprandial imaginings’, in D. Beriss and D. Sutton (eds), The
Restaurants Book: Ethnographies of Where We Eat . New York: Berg,
pp. 205–8.
Hess, R. (2001), ‘Distilled water, with a kick’. Electronic document, www.
drinkboy.com/Articles/Article.aspx?itemid=19, accessed 10 October 2011.
Hoffman, D. A. (2006), ‘The best puffery article ever’. Iowa Law Review 91,
101–51.
Hoffman, F. (1731), New Experiments and Observations upon Mineral Waters . . .
Trans. P. Shaw. London: J. Osborn and T. Longman.
Holdcroft, David. (1991), Saussure: Signs, System and Arbitrariness. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Holisky, D. A. (1989), ‘The rules of the supra or how to drink in Georgian’.
Annual of the Society for the Study of Caucasia 1, 22–40.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 233
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 233
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
234
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Horkheimer, M. (1974), ‘Feudal lord, customer, and specialist: the end of the
fairy tale of the customer as king’. Originally published in Horkheimer, M.,
1974, Critique of Instrumental Reason , Seabury Press, New York. Electronic
document, ( www.marxists.org/reference/archive/horkheimer/1964/customer.
htm ), accessed 22 January 2008.
Hull, M. (2003), ‘The fi le: agency, authority, and autography in an Islamabad
bureaucracy’. Language & Communication 23(3–4), 287–314.
— (2012), The Government of Paper: The Materiality of Bureaucracy in Urban
Pakistan. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Humphrey, C. (2002), The Unmaking of Soviet Life: Everyday Economies after
Socialism. Ithaca: Cornell.
Hutchby, I. (2001a), Conversation and Technology . Maldwin, MA: Blackwell.
— (2001b), ‘Technologies, texts and affordances’. Sociology 35, 441–56.
Iashvili, M. (1997), ‘Borjomis palsipik’at’orebs ucxoetshi unda vibrdzolot, ak k’i
nu davetaebit ertmanets!’ Axali Taoba 23, 4–5.
IMD (2006), Borjomi: Rebuilding a Brand Icon in Russia . Electronic document,
www.salfordcapital.com/pdf/Borjomi%20case-draft%20240406.pdf, accessed
10 October 2011.
Imnaishvili, N. (1998), ‘“Borjomis” ghirseba titkmis daucvelia’. Sakartvelos
Respublika 107, 9.
Irvine, J. (1979), ‘Formality and informality in communicative events’. American
Anthropologist 81, 773–90.
— (1989), ‘When talk isn’t cheap: language and political economy’. American
Ethnologist 16(2), 248–67.
Iskander, F. (1983), Sandro of Chegem. Trans. Susan Brownsberger. New York:
Vintage Books.
— (1984), The Gospel According to Chegem. Trans. Susan Brownsberger.
New York: Vintage Books.
Jeanneret, M. (1991), A Feast of Words: Banquets and Table Talk in the
Renaissance. Trans. Jeremy Whitely and Emma Hughes. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Jgerenaia, E. (2000), ‘Kartuli supris sociophilosophia da zogierti sxva ram’, in
G. Nodia (ed.), Kartuli Supra da Samokalako Sazogadoeba. Tbilisi: CIPDD,
pp. 31–56.
John, H. (2007), ‘Gin is in’. Bon Apetit June, 59–63.
Kadagishvili, Nana (2000), ‘Gauchinarebuli Borjomi tbilisshi gaiqida’, Axali
Epoka 11–14 August, 7.
Kanevskaya, M. (2004), ‘The shortest path to the truth: indirection in Fazil’
Iskander’. Modern Language Review 99(1), 131–49.
Kaplan, M. (2007), ‘Fijian water in Fiji and New York: local politics and global
commodity’. Cultural Anthropology 22(4), 685–706.
— (2011), ‘Lonely drinking fountains and comforting coolers: paradoxes of water
value and ironies of water use’. Cultural Anthropology 26(4), 514–41.
Karp, I. (1980), ‘Beer drinking and social experience in an African society:
an essay in formal sociology’, in I. Karp and C. S. Bird (eds), Explorations
in African Systems of Thought. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
pp. 83–119.
Keane, W. (2003), ‘Semiotics and the social analysis of material things’. Language
and Communication 23(3–4), 409–25.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 234
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 234
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
235
— (2008), ‘Market, materiality and moral metalanguage’. Anthropological
Theory 9(1), 27–42.
Kelly, C. and Volkov, V. (1998), ‘Directed desires: kult’urnost’ and consumption’,
in C. Kelly and D. Shepherd (eds), Constructing Russian Culture in the Age of
Revolution, 1881–1940. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 291–313.
Khalvashi, P. (1997), ‘K’ok’a-k’olas vin chakolavs?’ Sakartvelos Resp’ublik’a 5, 3.
Khizanishvili, N. (1940), Etnograpiuli Nats’erebi. Tbilisi: SSRK Mecnierebis
Ak’ademia.
Kiknadze, Z. (1991), [Editorial foreword], in N. Baliauri, Sts’orproba
Khevsuretshi. Tbilisi: Tbilisi University, pp. 3–7.
Kinkladze, Z. (2000), Kartuli Sadghegrdzeloebi. Tbilisi.
Kirkby, W. (1902), The Evolution of Artifi cial Mineral Waters. Manchester:
Jewsbury & Brown.
Kockelman, P. (2005), ‘The semiotic stance’. Semiotica 157(1/4), 233–304.
— (2010), ‘Enemies, parasites, and noise: how to take up residence in a system
without becoming a term in it’. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 20(2),
406–21.
Kotthoff, H. (1995), ‘The social semiotics of Georgian toast performances – oral
genre as cultural activity’. Journal of Pragmatics 24, 353–80.
Kuh, P. (2001), The Last Days of Haute Cuisine. New York: Viking Penguin.
Kupetz, G. and Botsch, M. (1999), The Mineral Water Bottle . Frankfurt: Verlag
Form.
Laghidze, M. (1953), Ualk’holo Sasmelebis Ts’armoeba. Tbilisi: T’eknik’a da
Shroma.
Latour, B. (1992), ‘Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane
artifacts’, in W. E. Bijker and J. Law (eds), Shaping Technology/Building Society:
Studies in Sociotechnical Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 225–58.
— (1993), We Have Never Been Modern . Trans. C. Porter. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
— (1999), Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
— (2005), Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Laudan, R. (2001), ‘A plea for culinary modernism’. Gastronomica 1, 36–44.
Laurier, E. (2003), ‘Field report 1: the basics of becoming a barista’. Electronic
document, http://web.ges.gla.ac.uk/~elaurier/cafesite/texts/barista.pdf,
accessed 22 January 2008.
— (2008), ‘Drinking up endings: conversational resources of the café’. Language
& Communication 28, 165–81.
Laurier, E. and Philo, C. (2007), ‘“A parcel of muddling muckworms”: revisiting
Habermas and the English coffee-houses’. Social & Cultural Geography 8(2),
259–81.
Law, J. (1999), ‘Objects, spaces and others’. Electronic document, published by the
Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University, UK, at www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/
sociology/papers/Law-Objects-Spaces-Others.pdf, accessed 10 October 2011.
Law, J. and Hetherington, K. (1999), ‘Materialities, spatialities, globalities’.
Electronic document, published by the Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster
University, UK, at www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/papers/Law-Hetherington-
Materialities-Spatialities-Globalities.pdf , accessed 10 October 2011.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 235
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 235
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
236
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Law, J. and Singleton, V. (2003), ‘Object lessons’. Electronic Document,
published by the Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University, UK, at
www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/papers/Law-Singleton-Object-Lessons.pdf,
accessed 10 October 2011.
Layton, S. (1992), ‘Eros and empire in Russian literature about Georgia’. Slavic
Review 51(2), 195–213.
Ledeneva, A. (1998), Russia’s Economy of Favours: Blat, Networking and
Informal Exchange. London: Cambridge.
Lee, B. and Li Puma, E. (2002), ‘Cultures of circulation: the imaginations of
modernity’. Public Culture 14(1), 191–213.
Lemon, A. (1998), ‘“Your eyes are green like dollars”: counterfeit cash, national
substance and currency apartheid in 1990s Russia’. Cultural Anthropology
13(1), 22–55.
— (2000), ‘Talking transit and spectating transition: the Moscow Metro’, in
D. Berdahl (ed.), Altering States: Ethnographies of Transition in Eastern Europe
and the Former Soviet Union. Anne Arbor: University of Michigan, pp. 14–39.
— (2009), ‘The emotional lives of Moscow things’. Russian History 36, 201–18.
Levinson, S. (1983), Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lomidze, E. (2003), ‘Limonati tu sats’amlavi, anu ualk’oholo sasmelebis biznesis
p’roblemebi’. Electronic document, www.mmeconomics.com.ge/kartuli/
nomer%204_2003/art6.htm, accessed 20 January 2004.
Lury, C. (2004), Brands: The Logos of the Global Economy. London: Routledge.
Lyons, J. (1977), Semantics. Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MacLean, W. R. (1959), ‘On the acoustics of cocktail parties’. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 31(1), 79–80.
Makalatia, S. (1984), Khevsureti. Tbilisi: Nakaduli.
— (1998 [1925]), Pshauri Ts’ats’loba da Khevsuruli Sts’orproba. Tbilisi:
Int’elekt’i.
Manning, P. (2001), ‘The craft of reference: the Welsh language and the division
of labor in Nineteenth Century slate quarries’. Language & Communication
21(3), 209–33.
— (2002), ‘Welsh rocks and English money: ideologies of divisions of
language and divisions of labor in Nineteenth century Welsh slate quarries’.
Comparative Studies in Society and History 44(3), 481–510.
— (2004), ‘The streets of Bethesda: the slate quarrier and the Welsh language in
the Welsh Liberal imagination’. Language in Society 33, 517–48.
— (2006), ‘Words and things, goods and services: problems of translation
between language and political economy’. Language & Communication 26,
270–84.
— (2007a), ‘Love Khevsur style: the romance of the mountains and mountaineer
romance in Georgian ethnography’, in B. Grant and L. Yalçın-Heckmann
(eds), Caucasus Paradigms: Anthropologies, Histories, and the Making of a
World Area . Berlin: LIT Verlag, pp. 23–46.
— (2007b), ‘Rose-colored glasses? Color revolutions and cartoon chaos in post-
socialist Georgia’. Cultural Anthropology 22(2), 171–213.
— (2008), ‘Materiality and cosmology: old Georgian churches as sacred, sublime,
and secular objects’. Ethnos 73(3), 327–60.
— (2009a), ‘The city of balconies: elite politics and the changing semiotics of the
post-socialist cityscape’, in K. Van Assche, J. Salukvadze and N. Shavishvili
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 236
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 236
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:54 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
237
(eds), City Culture and City Planning in Tbilisi. Where Europe and Asia Meet ,
Lewiston: Mellen Press, pp. 71–102.
— (2009b), ‘The epoch of Magna: capitalist brands and postsocialist revolutions
in Georgia’. Slavic Review 68(4), 924–45.
— (2010), ‘The semiotics of brand’. Annual Review of Anthropology 39, 33–49.
Manning, P. and Meneley, A. (2008), ‘Material objects in cosmological worlds: an
introduction’. Ethnos 73(3), 285–302.
Manning, P. and Uplisashvili, A. (2007), ‘“Our beer”: ethnographic brands in
postsocialist Georgia’. American Anthropologist 109(4), 626–41.
Mars, G. and Altman, Y. (1983), ‘The cultural bases of Soviet Georgia’s second
economy’. Soviet Studies 4, 546–60.
— (1991), ‘Alternative mechanisms of distribution in a Soviet economy’, in
M. Douglas (ed.), Constructive Drinking . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 270–9.
Marx, K. (1887), Capital. Volume 1. Trans. Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling.
Electronic document, www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/,
accessed 10 October 2011.
— (1973), Grundrisse. Trans. Martin Nicolaus. Electronic document, www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1857/grundrisse/, accessed 10 October 2011.
Marx, L. (1964), The Machine in the Garden. New York: Oxford.
Matus, V. (2011), ‘Vodka nation: how the fl avorless, colorless, odorless
spirit became a billion-dollar business’. Weekly Standard Magazine
16(45). Electronic document¸ www.weeklystandard.com/articles/vodka-
nation_582069.html?nopager=1, accessed 10 October 2011.
Mazzarella, W. (2003), Shoveling Smoke: Advertising and Globalization in
Contemporary India. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Meneley, A. (2004), ‘Extra virgin olive oil and slow food’. Anthropologica 46,
165–76.
— (2007), ‘Like an extra virgin’. American Anthropologist 109(4), 678–87.
— (2008), ‘Oleo-signs and quali-signs: the qualities of olive oil’. Ethnos 73(3),
303–26.
— (forthcoming), ‘Food and morality in Yemen’, in L. Coleman (ed.), Food:
Ethnographic Encounters. New York: Berg.
Miller, D. (1998), ‘Coca-Cola: a black sweet drink from Trinidad’, in D. Miller
(ed.) Material Cultures: Why Some Things Matter. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 169–88.
— (2002), ‘Artefacts and the meaning of things’, in T. Ingold (ed.), Companion
Encyclopedia of Anthropology: Humanity, Culture and Social Life. London:
Routledge, pp. 397–419.
Mische, A. and White, H. C. (1998), ‘Between conversation and situation: public
switching dynamics across network domains’. Social Research 65(3), 695–724.
Moore, R. (2003), ‘From genericide to viral marketing: on “brand”’. Language &
Communication 23(3–4), 331–57.
Mühlfried, F. (2005a), ‘Banquets, grant-eaters and the red intelligentsia in post-
Soviet Georgia’. Central Eurasian Studies Review 4(1), 16–19.
— (2005b), Postsowjetische Feiern – Das Georgische Bankett im Wandel. Ph.D.
Dissertation, Universität Hamburg.
Munn, N. (1977), ‘Spatiotemporal transformations of Gawa canoes’. Journal de
la Societe de Oceanistes 33, 39–55.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 237
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 237
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
238
BIBLIOGRAPHY
— (1986), The Fame of Gawa: A Symbolic Study of Value Transformations in a
Massim (Papua, New Guineau) Society . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Nakassis, C. (forthcoming a), ‘Counterfeiting what? Willful ignorance and the
brand in Tamil Nadu, India’. Anthropological Quarterly, special issue on
Piracy.
— (forthcoming b), ‘Introduction: the unauthorized social lives of brands and
their surfeits’. Cultural Anthropology.
NDRC (1999), Bottled Water: Pure Drink or Pure Hype? Electronic document,
www.nrdc.org/water/drinking/bw/bwinx.asp, accessed 10 October 2011.
Nizharadze, G. (2000), ‘Kartuli supra k’ult’urul k’ont’ekst’shi’, in G. Nodia (ed.),
Kartuli Supra da Samokalako Sazogadoeba. Tbilisi: CIPDD, pp. 22–30.
Nodia, G. (2000), [Editor’s Introduction], in G. Nodia (ed.), Kartuli Supra da
Samokalako Sazogadoeba. Tbilisi: CIPDD, pp. 5–8.
— (2002), ‘Paradigmis cvla?’ in G. Nodia (ed.), Sazogadoeba da P’olit’ik’a 4:
Dzveli Int’eligentsia da Axali Int’elektu’alebi . Tbilisi: CIPDD, pp. 9–22.
Ochiauri, A. (1980), St’umarmasp’indzloba Khevsuretshi. Tbilisi: Mecniereba.
— (2005), Kartuli Xalxuri Dgheobebis K’alendari: Khevsureti. T’omi 2. Tbilisi:
Ena da K’ult’ura.
Ochiauri, T. (1954), Kartvelta Udzvelesi Sarc’munoebis Ist’oriidan. Tbilisi:
Mecniereba.
Oldenburg, R. (1989), The Great Good Place. New York: Paragon House.
Ortiz, F. (1995 [1947]), Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
Orwell, G. (1934), Burmese Days. New York: Harper Brothers.
Parmentier, R. (1994), Signs in Society: Studies in Semiotic Anthropology.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Parry, B. (2008), ‘Geographical indications: not all “champagne and roses” ’,
in L. Bently, J. Davis and J. C. Ginsburg (eds), Trade Marks and Brands:
An Interdisciplinary Critique. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 361–80.
Paxson, H. (2010), ‘Locating value in artisan cheese: reverse engineering terroir
for new-world landscapes’. American Anthropologist 112(3), 444–57.
Peirce, C. S. (1868), ‘Some consequences of four incapacities’. Journal of
Speculative Philosophy 2, 140–57. Electronic document, www.peirce.org/
writings/p27.html, accessed 10 October 2011.
— (1931–58), Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , 8 volumes, vols 1–6,
ed. Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, vols 7–8, ed. Arthur W. Burks.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pelevin, V. (2000 [1999]), Babylon. Trans. Andrew Bromfi eld. London: Faber and
Faber. Electronic document, www.electroniclibrary21.ru/literature/pelewin/41.
shtml, accessed 10 October 2011.
Pelkmans, M. (2006), Defending the Border: Identity, Religion, and Modernity
in the Republic of Georgia. Ithaca: Cornell.
Peters, E. (1984), ‘The paucity of ritual among Middle Eastern pastoralists’, in
A. Ahmed and D. Hart (eds), Islam in Tribal Societies: From the Atlas to the
Indus. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 187–219.
Pfaffenberger, B. (1992), ‘The social anthropology of technology’. Annual Review
of Anthropology 21, 491–516.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 238
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 238
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
239
Phillips, J. (2003), Trademark law: A Practical Anatomy . Oxford: Oxford
University press.
Pollan, M. (2003), ‘Naturally’, in B. Marranca (ed.), A Slice of Life: Contemporary
Writers on Food. Woodstock, New York and London: Overlook Duckworth,
pp. 153–70.
Postone, M. (1993), Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of
Marx’ Critical Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pruidze, L. (2001), ‘Ganatlebulta dilet’ant’izmi anu ras erchit erovnuli cxovrebis
ts’ess da kartul supras?’ Lit’erat’uruli Sakartvelo 9–12 February 2001, 12–13.
Putnam, H. (1975), ‘The meaning of “meaning”’, in Philosophical Papers,
Vol. 2: Mind, Language, and Reality. New York: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 215–71.
Qipiani, N. (2003), ‘Kalaki sark’e’. Iliazdi 1(1), 9–12.
Quam-Wickham, N. (1999), ‘Rereading man’s conquest of nature: skill, myths
and the historical construction of masculinity in Western extractive industries’.
Men and Masculinities 2(2), 135–51.
Rabinbach, A. (1990), The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue and the Origins of
Modernity . New York: Basic Books.
Riesman, D., Potter, R. J. and Watson, J. (1960), ‘The vanishing host’. Human
Organization 19(1), 17–27.
Robbins, B. (2007), ‘The smell of infrastructure: notes toward an archive’.
Boundary 2 34(1), 25–33.
Roseberry, W. (1996), ‘The rise of yuppie coffee and the re-imagination of class in
the United States’. American Anthropologist 98(4), 762–75.
Royte, E. (2008), Bottlemania: How Water Went on Sale and Why We Bought It.
New York: Bloomsbury.
Rudin, M. (1997), ‘There is something about a martini’. American Heritage
Magazine 48(4). Electronic document, www.americanheritage.com/articles/
magazine/ah/1997/4/1997_4_32.shtm, accessed 10 October 2011.
Sahlins, M. (1976), Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Said, E. (1979), Orientalism. New York: Vintage books.
Sanders, T. and West, H. (2003), ‘Power revealed and concealed in the new
world order’, in H. West and T. Sanders (eds), Transparency and Conspiracy:
Ethnographies of Suspicion in the New World Order. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, pp. 1–37.
Schechter, F. (1927), ‘The rational basis of trademark protection’. Harvard Law
Review 40, 813–33.
Schegloff, E. A. (1988), ‘Goffman and the analysis of conversation’, in P. Drew
and A. Wootton (eds), Erving Goffman: Exploring the Interaction Order.
Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 89–135.
Serres, M. (1982), The Parasite. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Shanidze, A. (1931), Khalkhuri P’oezia: Khevsuruli. Tbilisi.
Shatirishvili, Z. (2003), ‘“Old” intelligentsia and “new” intellectuals: the
Georgian experience’. Electronic document, www.eurozine.com/articles/2003-
06-26-shatirishvili-en.html, accessed 10 June 2004.
Sidnell, J. (2007), ‘Comparative studies in conversation analysis’. Annual Review
of Anthropology 36, 229–44.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 239
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 239
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
240
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sigua, A. (1980), Mitrophane Laghidze. Tbilisi.
Silverstein, M. (2003), ‘Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic life’.
Language & Communication 23(3–4), 193–229.
— (2006), ‘Old wine, new ethnographic lexicography’. Annual Review of
Anthropology 35, 481–96.
Silvio, T. (2010), ‘Animation: the new performance?’ Journal of Linguistic
Anthropology 20(2), 422–38.
Simmel, G. (1949), ‘The sociology of sociability’. The American Journal of
Sociology 55(3), 254–61.
Sinha, M. (2001), ‘Britishness, clubbability and the colonial public sphere: the
geneaology of an imperial institution in colonial India’. The Journal of British
Studies 40(4), 489–521.
Stanco, V. (1986), ‘Sit’rodan ghvinisadme’. Tbilisi 2 December, 5–6. (Translated
and reprinted from Khimia i Zhizn 1986, no. 10.)
Star, S. L. (1999), ‘The ethnography of infrastructure’. American Behavioral
Scientist 43(3), 377–91.
Starbucks (2003), Make It Your Drink, a Guide to Starbucks Beverages. Seattle:
Starbucks Coffee Company.
Stasch, R. (2003), ‘The semiotics of world-making in Korowai feast longhouses’.
Language & Communication 23(3–4), 359–83.
Steedman, C. (2007), Master and Servant: Love and Labour in the English
Industrial Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Steward, J. (2002), ‘The culture of the water-cure in nineteenth century Austria’,
in S. Anderson and B. Tabb (eds), Water, Lesire and Culture: European
Historical Perspectives. Oxford: Berg, pp. 23–35.
Tambiah, S. J. (1985), ‘A performative approach to ritual’, in Culture, Thought
and Action: An Anthropological Perspective. Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press, pp. 123–66.
Tbilisi (1996), ‘Ra Gind K’argi Kudi Gvkondes’. Tbilisi 27 July, 2–3.
Tevdoradze, G. (1930), Khuti Ts’eli Pshav-Khevsuretshi. Tbilisi.
Tezelishvili, S. (2000), Supris K’odeksi, Manipest’i, Tamadis Mist’eria da
Inst’tit’ut’i Dzvel Sakartveloshi . Tbilisi: C. C. Tezelishvili.
Tichborne, C. R. C. and James, P. (1883), The Mineral Waters of Europe.
London: Balliere, Tindall & Cox.
Trader Vic. (1946), Trader Vic’s Book of Food & Drink. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
Tuite, K. (2000), ‘“Antimarriage” in ancient Georgian society’. Anthropological
Linguistics 42(1), 37–60.
— (2002), ‘Real and imagined feudalism in highland Georgia’. Amirani 7, 25–43.
— (2005), ‘The autocrat of the banquet table: the political and social signifi cance
of the Georgian supra ’. Electronic document, www.mapageweb.umontreal.ca/
tuitekj/publications/Tuite-supra.pdf , accessed 23 November 2007.
Tuite, K. and Bukhrashvili, P. (1999), ‘Binarité et complémentarité en Géorgie
du nord-est. La présentation des garçons et des fi lles au sanctuaire d’Iaqsar’.
Amirani 3, 41–55.
Tvauri, M. P. (2002), K’urort’i Borjomi da Misi Unik’aluri Mineraluri Ts’q’lebi.
T’omi 2. Borjomi.
Vadachkoria, M. K., Ushveridze, G. A. and Jaliashvili, V. G. (1987), Health
Resorts of the Georgian SSR. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 240
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 240
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
BIBLIOGRAPHY
241
Valeri, V. (2001), ‘Feasting and festivity’, in V. Valeri, Fragments from Forests
and Libraries. Durham, NC: Academic Press, pp. 1–14.
Van Assche, K., Salukvadze, J. and Duineveld, M. (forthcoming), ‘Speed, vitality
and innovation in the reinvention of Georgian planning: aspects of integration
and role formation’. European Planning Studies.
Vann, E. F. (2005), ‘Domesticating consumer goods in the global economy:
examples from Vietnam and Russia’. Ethnos 70(4), 465–88.
— (2006), ‘The limits of authenticity in Vietnamese consumer markets’.
American Anthropologist 108(2), 286–96.
Viveiros de Castro, E. (2004), ‘Exchanging perspectives: the transformation of
objects into subjects in Amerindian ontologies’. Common Knowledge 10(3),
463–84.
Volkov, V. (2000), ‘The concept of kul’turnost’ : notes on the Stalinist civilizing
process’, in S. Fitzpatrick (ed.), Stalinism: New Directions . London: Routledge,
pp. 210–30.
Walton, G. E. (1873), The Mineral Springs of the United States and Canada.
New York: D. Appleton & Company.
Warner, M. (2002), ‘Publics and counterpublics’. Public Culture 14(1), 49–90.
Weiss, B. (2011), ‘Making pigs local: discerning the sensory character of place’.
Cultural Anthropology 26(3), 438–61.
Wilk, R. (2006), ‘Bottled water: the pure commodity in the age of branding’.
Journal of Consumer Culture 6(3), 303–25.
Willson, M. (2005), ‘Indulgence’, in D. Kulick and A. Meneley (eds), Fat: The
Anthropology of an Obsession. New York: Tarcher/Penguin, pp. 153–67.
Xicishvili, O. (1998), ‘“Tsruborjoms”, turme, Borjomshits asxamen’. Sakartvelos
Resp’ublik’a 14 April 1988.
Yurchak, A. (2005), Everything Was Forever, until It Was No More: The Last
Soviet Generation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Zurabishvili, D. (2002), ‘Dzveli int’eligentsiidan axal int’elekt’ualebamde’, in
G. Nodia (ed.), Dzveli Int’eligentsia da Axali Int’elektualebi. CIPDD: Tbilisi,
pp. 47–53.
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 241
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 241
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:55 AM
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 242
9781441160188_Ref_Final_txt_print.indd 242
2/25/2012 3:13:56 AM
2/25/2012 3:13:56 AM
INDEX
affordance 13–14 , 76 , 193 , 201
139–40 , 148 , 150–3 , 158 , 161 ,
animation 25–6 , 100–1 , 132–4 , 137 ,
163–4 , 170 , 173 , 178 , 184 , 193 ,
141–2 , 146
196–7 , 202 , 205–11 , 214–16 ,
anthropomorphism 25–6 , 58
221
artisanal (craft) production 23–7 ,
conversation 1 , 3 , 17 , 31 , 35–40 , 43 ,
29 , 31 , 56–7 , 66 , 76 , 78–9 , 80 ,
44–8 , 51 , 53 , 57–9 , 69 , 71–5 ,
81–90 , 144–6 , 218 , 225
137
aspirational messaging 24 , 26–7 ,
Conversation Analysis, 44 , 46–7 ,
79–84 , 225
57 , 72
‘culinary luddism’ vs. ‘culinary
brand 19 , 23 , 31 , 32 , 35–6 , 40–2 , 45 , modernism’ 23–4 , 29 , 31–2 , 56 ,
46 , 54 , 79–80 , 84 , 86–7 , 91–4 ,
65–6 , 77–85 , 90 , 144–6
103 , 105 , 107 , 109–10 , 112–17 ,
culturedness ( kul’turnost’ ) 124–7 ,
119–20 , 132–47 , 206–25
152–3 , 155 , 166 , 171 , 173–6 ,
‘the product and the brand’ 24–8 ,
208–9
29 , 142–3
bribery 156–9 , 170
disemia 87 , 149–52 , 163 , 172 , 206–9
chain of authentication 21–2 , 106–10 ,
elsewheres (imaginary) 17–20 , 60 , 82 ,
196–7
120–1 , 131 , 134 , 140 , 150
channel (of communication) 2 , 15–17 ,
expertise 8–10 , 21 , 25–6 , 49–50 ,
31 , 71–6 , 91 , 164
54–5 , 78 , 92 , 99 , 106 , 136 , 196
circulation 16 , 18 , 31 , 49 , 104–5 ,
107 , 157 , 178–84 , 191 , 193–7 ,
genre (communication) 15 , 32 , 35 ,
200–4 , 207
37–9 , 44 , 45 , 68–9 , 72 , 74 , cultures of circulation 17–20
152–3 , 169 , 187–92
Coca-Cola 24 , 31 , 87 , 119–23 , 128 , gift-exchange 156–8 , 179 , 181–5 , 186 ,
133–43 , 211–12
193 , 199 , 229n. 3
cocktail 4 , 7–8 , 18 , 61 , 64 , 69 , 72 , gin and tonic 5 , 18–19 , 60 , 68 , 78
76–7
‘girl drink’ 4–6 , 10 , 15 , 76–7
cocktail party 4 , 15 , 16 , 31 , 64 ,
68–76 , 169
‘heritage cue’ 79–82 , 225
commercial speech, ideologies of 26–7 ,
hybrids (nature-culture, sociotechnical,
50 , 58 , 95
ontological or ideological,
communication 15–18 , 43 , 47 , 53 , 57 ,
etc.) 10 , 23 , 27 , 29 , 31 , 47 ,
71–5
49–50 , 54 , 57 , 79–81 , 87–9 ,
consumption 3 , 8–9 , 14–15 , 17–20 ,
114–17 , 118–19 , 121 , 194–6 ,
22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 29 , 31–2 , 40–2 ,
206–7 , 225
46 , 49 , 54 , 88 , 111 , 124–7 ,
opposed to parasite 91 , 94–5
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 243
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 243
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
244
INDEX
industrial production 18 , 23–4 ,
human producer 23, 92, 100, 103,
29–31 , 42–3 , 56–7 , 60 , 65–6 ,
110, 127, 144–7, 224
76 , 81–4 , 128 , 135 , 144–6 ,
nature as producer 23,93, 100–3,
214–16 , 218–19
110, 114–17, 127, 144–7, 224
infrastructure 72 , 87 , 89–90 , 164 ,
personalistic producer or source
173 , 175
(fi rm, undertaking) 22, 92–3,
infrastructure (of communicative
102–3, 144
channels) 4 , 15–17 , 30 , 35 , rivalrous (capitalist) producers 102–3,
71–4 , 108 , 150 , 153–5 , 164 , 208
135–42, 228n. 3
state as producer 103–5, 108–9,
naturalism (ontology) 28–9 , 144–5 ,
122–31, 136, 140, 163–4, 173–6
225
production 14 , 16 , 18–19 , 20–9 , 40 , nature,
41–3 , 48–50 , 54 , 61 , 64–7 , 76 ,
animate Nature 97 , 100–2
78–85
conversation as ‘natural’ 44 , 46
productivism (ontology) 28 , 48–50 ,
natural kind terms 9 , 25 , 50 , 102 ,
127–8 , 143–6 , 164 , 173 ,
105–6 , 109–16
207 , 215
nature/culture dualism
public (sphere, space, infrastructures,
(naturalism) 23 , 28–9 , 65–7 , 86 , etc.) 16 , 32 , 35–6 , 46–7 , 56–7 ,
87–9
71 , 86 , 89–90 , 105 , 109 , 111 ,
nature as producer 93, 100–3, 110,
131 , 150 , 162–3 , 169 , 178 , 179 ,
114–17, 145–7
181–2 , 184–6 , 188–93 , 197 , 203 , nature-culture hybrid 23 , 31 , 89 ,
204 , 206–9 , 214 , 221–2
114–17 , 206–7 , 225
puffery 26–8 , 80 , 95
natures 91–5 , 100–2
purity 7 , 21 , 31 , 64–5 , 67–8 , 76 , 77 , 81 ,
production as ‘natural’
83 , 87–95 , 114 , 188 , 193–7 , 200
(productivism) 25 , 28–9 , 65–7 ,
76 , 78–85
qualisign 7 , 11–14 , 20–1 , 64–8 , 76 ,
second nature 6
80 , 83–4 , 95 , 198 , 200
water as emblem of ‘natural’ 85
noise 31 , 71–6
reference 8–9 , 25 , 40–3 , 45 , 50 , 52–6 ,
58 , 59 , 92
parasite (semiotic) 9 , 24 , 71–2 , 87–8 , and ‘natural kind’ terms 9 , 25 , 50 ,
91 , 94–5 , 104 , 108–9 , 214
102 , 105–6 , 109–16
Pepsi-Cola 31 , 86 , 93 , 118–23 , 143
reference as trial 8
‘phatic labor’ 16 , 36 , 71–5 , 164 , 173
referential ideology 25–8 , 58 ,
private (sphere, space, etc.) 46 , 56–7 ,
79–80 , 93 , 95 , 102 , 142–5
131 , 150–1 , 162–3 , 171 , 175 ,
regulated reference 28 , 95 , 100
177–8 , 181 , 184–93 , 197 , 203 ,
ritual 9 , 14–16 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 31–2 ,
206 , 207 , 209 , 214 , 221–2
56–7 , 61–2 , 63 , 68 , 70–1 , 148–
private property 109 , 112
73 , 178 , 182–3 , 185–6 , 188–90 ,
producer 18, 23–4, 42, 49, 81–3,
192–8 , 200–4 , 207–8 , 210–11 ,
92–3, 100, 103, 105, 107,
217 , 220
110–12, 114, 119, 128, 136–9,
140–2, 144–7, 185, 202, 213,
sociability 3 , 30 , 35–6 , 44 , 46 , 48 , 50 ,
215, 218
56 , 63 , 68 , 70–4 , 153 , 179 , 183–4 , anonymous producer
201 , 203 , 206 , 207–11 , 221–2
(anonymity) 18, 23–4, 82, 121,
‘architecture of sociability’ 16 , 35 ,
136, 189–91, 202
210 , 221–2
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 244
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 244
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
INDEX
245
source 20–4
water 19 , 24 , 31–2 , 68 , 78 , 81 , 83–5 , natural source (water) 89 , 91–2 , 98 ,
86–117 , 131 , 133 , 136 , 198 , 213 ,
101–3 , 109–10 , 115–17
218 , 224–5
personalistic (trademark, fi rm,
artifi cial mineral water 101–2
undertaking) 22, 92–3, 103
carbonated water 98 , 101 ,
source-identifying indexical 20–4 ,
114
80 , 83 , 92–3 , 105 , 195–6
chlorinated (municipal tap)
Stalinism 117 , 124–5 , 127 , 129 ,
water 68 , 88 , 89–90 , 91 ,
148–50 , 167–8 , 172 , 173–6 , 177
94 , 136
medicinal water 95–8 , 99 ,
terroir 22–4 , 66–7 , 76 , 79 , 84–5 , 88 ,
100–1
93 , 144 , 225
natural mineral water 31 , 86–9 ,
trademark 22–3 , 24 , 92–4 , 102–3 ,
92–3 , 95–103 , 105
105 , 107 , 109–12 , 132 , 228n. 3
purifi ed water 68 , 87–95
trial (organoleptic, product,
spring water 68 , 87–9 , 91–5 , 101 ,
technoscientifi c, etc.) 8–10 , 21 ,
112–13 , 115–16 , 131 ,
25–6 , 40 , 93 , 95–6 , 159
223–4
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 245
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 245
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 246
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 246
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 247
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 247
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:22 PM
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 248
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 248
3/1/2012 12:01:23 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:23 PM
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 249
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 249
3/1/2012 12:01:23 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:23 PM
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 250
9781441160188_Index_Final_txt_print.indd 250
3/1/2012 12:01:23 PM
3/1/2012 12:01:23 PM
Document Outline
Cover
Halftitle
Seriespage
Title
Copyright
Contents
1 Introduction
2 Coffee
3 Gin
4 Water
5 Colas and uncolas
6 Wine
7 Vodka
8 Beer
Notes
Bibliography
Index

